The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maya Chronicles, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Maya Chronicles
       Brinton's Library Of Aboriginal American Literature,  Number 1

Author: Various

Editor: Daniel G. Brinton

Release Date: December 28, 2006 [EBook #20205]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAYA CHRONICLES ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note

A number of typographical errors and inconsistencies have been
maintained in this version of this book. They have been marked with a
[TN-#], which refers to a description in the complete list found at the
end of the text. One error that was corrected is also listed at the end
of the text.

The following code is used for a character that is not able to be
represented in the text format used for this version of the book.

  [k]   tresillo




              LIBRARY

                OF

        ABORIGINAL AMERICAN
            LITERATURE.

               No. 1.

             EDITED BY

           D. G. BRINTON




        BRINTON'S LIBRARY OF
  ABORIGINAL AMERICAN LITERATURE.
             NUMBER 1.




                THE
          MAYA CHRONICLES.




             EDITED BY
         DANIEL G. BRINTON


             AMS PRESS
              NEW YORK




  Reprinted from the edition of 1882, Philadelphia
  First AMS EDITION published 1969
  Manufactured in the United States of America

  Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 70-83457

  AMS PRESS, INC.
  New York, N.Y. 10003




                    TO THE MEMORY
                         OF
             CARL HERMANN BERENDT, M.D.,

  WHOSE LONG AND EARNEST DEVOTION TO THE ETHNOLOGY
    AND LINGUISTICS OF AMERICA HAS MADE THIS WORK
       POSSIBLE, AND WHOSE UNTIMELY DEATH HAS
          LOST TO AMERICAN SCHOLARS RESULTS
             OF FAR GREATER IMPORTANCE,

              THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED.




PREFACE.


The belief that the only solid foundation for the accurate study of
American ethnology and linguistics must be in the productions of the
native mind in their original form has led me to the venturesome
undertaking of which this is the first issue. The object of the proposed
series of publications is to preserve permanently a number of rude
specimens of literature composed by the members of various American
tribes, and exhibiting their habits of thought, modes of expressions,
intellectual range and æsthetic faculties.

Whether the literary and historical value of these monuments is little
or great, they merit the careful attention of all who would weigh and
measure the aboriginal mind, and estimate its capacities correctly.

The neglect of this field of study is largely owing to a deficiency of
material for its pursuit. Genuine specimens of native literature are
rare, and almost or quite inaccessible. They remain in manuscript in the
hands of a few collectors, or, if printed, they are in forms not
convenient to obtain, as in the ponderous transactions of learned
societies, or in privately printed works. My purpose is to gather
together from these sources a dozen volumes of moderate size and
reasonable price, and thus to put the material within the reach of
American and European scholars.

Now that the first volume is ready, I see in it much that can be
improved upon in subsequent issues. I must ask for it an indulgent
criticism, for the novelty of the undertaking and its inherent
difficulties have combined to make it less finished and perfected than
it should have been.

If the series meets with a moderate encouragement, it will be continued
at the rate of two or three volumes of varying size a year, and will, I
think, prove ultimately of considerable service to the students of man
in his simpler conditions of life and thought, especially of American
man.




CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

  § 1. The Name Maya, p. 9. § 2. The Maya Linguistic Family, p. 17.
    § 3. Origin of the Maya Tribes, p. 20. § 4. Political Condition at
    the Time of the Conquest, p. 25. § 5. Grammatical Observations, p. 27.
    § 6. The Numeral System, p. 37. § 7. The Calendar, p. 50. § 8. Ancient
    Hieroglyphic Books, p. 61. § 9. Modern Maya Manuscripts, p. 67.
    § 10. Grammars and Dictionaries, p. 72.


THE CHRONICLES.

  INTRODUCTORY                                                     p. 81

    I. The Series of the Katuns, p. 89. Text, p. 95. Translation,
       p. 100. Notes, p. 106.

   II. The Series of the Katuns, p. 136. Text, p. 138. Translation,
       p. 144. Notes, p. 150.

  III. The Record of the Count of the Katuns, p. 152. Text, p. 153.
       Translation, p. 158. Notes, p. 163.

   IV. The Maya Katuns, p. 165. Text, p. 166. Translation, p. 169.
       Notes, p. 173.

    V. The Chief Katuns, p. 177. Text, p. 178. Translation, p. 180.
       Notes, p. 182.


THE CHRONICLE OF CHAC XULUB CHEN.

  Introductory, p. 189. Text, p. 193. Translation, p. 216. Notes,
  p. 242.

  VOCABULARY                                                      p. 261




I.

INTRODUCTION.

CONTENTS.

1. THE NAME "MAYA." 2. THE MAYA LINGUISTIC FAMILY. 3. ORIGIN OF THE MAYA
TRIBES. 4. POLITICAL CONDITION AT THE TIME OF THE CONQUEST. 5.
GRAMMATICAL OBSERVATIONS. 6. THE NUMERAL SYSTEM. 7. THE CALENDAR. 8.
ANCIENT HIEROGLYPHIC BOOKS. 9. MODERN MAYA MANUSCRIPTS. 10. GRAMMARS AND
DICTIONARIES OF THE LANGUAGE.


§ 1. _The Name "Maya."_

In his second voyage, Columbus heard vague rumors of a mainland westward
from Jamaica and Cuba, at a distance of ten days' journey in a
canoe.[9-1] Its inhabitants were said to be clothed, and the specimens
of wax which were found among the Cubans must have been brought from
there, as they themselves did not know how to prepare it.

During his fourth voyage (1503-4), when he was exploring the Gulf
southwest from Cuba, he picked up a canoe laden with cotton clothing
variously dyed. The natives in it gave him to understand that they were
merchants, and came from a land called MAIA.[10-1]

This is the first mention in history of the territory now called
Yucatan, and of the race of the Mayas; for although a province of
similar name was found in the western extremity of the island of Cuba,
the similarity was accidental, as the evidence is conclusive that no
colony of the Mayas was found on the Antilles.[10-2] These islands were
peopled by a wholly different stock, the remnants of whose language
prove them to have been the northern outposts of the Arawacks of Guiana,
and allied to the great Tupi-Guaranay stem of South America.

MAYA was the patrial name of the natives of Yucatan. It was the proper
name of the northern portion of the peninsula. No single province bore
it at the date of the Conquest, and probably it had been handed down as
a generic term from the period, about a century before, when this whole
district was united under one government.

The natives of all this region called themselves _Maya uinic_, Maya men,
or _ah Mayaa_, those of Maya; their language was _Maya than_, the Maya
speech; a native woman was _Maya cħuplal_; and their ancient capital was
_Maya pan_, the MAYA banner, for there of old was set up the standard of
the nation, the elaborately worked banner of brilliant feathers, which,
in peace and in war, marked the rallying point of the Confederacy.

We do not know where they drew the line from others speaking the same
tongue. That it excluded the powerful tribe of the Itzas, as a recent
historian thinks,[12-1] seems to be refuted by the documents I bring
forward in the present volume; that, on the other hand, it did not
include the inhabitants of the southwestern coast appears to be
indicated by the author of one of the oldest and most complete
dictionaries of the language. Writing about 1580, when the traditions of
descent were fresh, he draws a distinction between the _lengua de Maya_
and the _lengua de Campeche_.[12-2] The latter was a dialect varying
very slightly from pure Maya, and I take it, this manner of indicating
the distinction points to a former political separation.

The name Maya is also found in the form _Mayab_, and this is asserted by
various Yucatecan scholars of the present generation, as Pio Perez,
Crescencio Carrillo, and Eligio Ancona, to be the correct ancient form,
while the other is but a Spanish corruption.[13-1]

But this will not bear examination. All the authorities, native as well
as foreign, of the sixteenth century, write _Maya_. It is impossible to
suppose that such laborious and earnest students as the author of the
Dictionary of Motul, as the grammarian and lexicographer Gabriel de San
Buenaventura, and as the educated natives whose writings I print in this
volume, could all have fallen into such a capital blunder.[13-2]

The explanation I have to offer is just the reverse. The use of the
terminal _b_ in "Mayab" is probably a dialectic error, other examples of
which can be quoted. Thus the writer of the Dictionary of Motul informs
us that the form _maab_ is sometimes used for the ordinary negative
_ma_, no; but, he adds, it is a word of the lower classes, _es palabra
de gente comun_. So I have little doubt but that _Mayab_ is a vulgar
form of the word, which may have gradually gained ground.

As at present used, the accent usually falls on the first syllable,
_Ma´ya_, and the best old authorities affirm this as a rule; but it is a
rule subject to exceptions, as at the end of a sentence and in certain
dialects Dr. Berendt states that it is not infrequently heard as
_Ma´ya´_ or even _Maya´_.[14-1]

The meaning and derivation of the word have given rise to the usual
number of nonsensical and far-fetched etymologies. The Greek, the
Sanscrit, the ancient Coptic and the Hebrew have all been called in to
interpret it. I shall refer to but a few of these profitless
suggestions.

The Abbé Brasseur (de Bourbourg) quotes as the opinion of Don Ramon de
Ordoñez, the author of a strange work on American archæology, called
_History of the Heaven and the Earth_, that _Maya_ is but an
abbreviation of the phrase _ma ay ha_, which, the Abbé adds, means word
for word, _non adest aqua_, and was applied to the peninsula on account
of the scarcity of water there.[15-1]

Unfortunately that phrase has no such, nor any, meaning in Maya; were it
_ma yan haa_, it would have the sense he gives it; and further, as the
Abbé himself remarked in a later work, it is not applicable to Yucatan,
where, though rivers are scarce, wells and water abound. He therefore
preferred to derive it from _ma_ and _ha_, which he thought he could
translate either "Mother of the Water," or "Arm of the Land!"[15-2]

The latest suggestion I have noticed is that of Eligio Ancona, who,
claiming that _Mayab_ is the correct form, and that this means "not
numerous," thinks that it was applied to the first native settlers of
the land, on account of the paucity of their numbers![15-3]

All this seems like learned trifling. The name may belong to that
ancient dialect from which are derived many of the names of the days and
months in the native calendar, and which, as an esoteric language, was
in use among the Maya priests, as was also one among the Aztecs of
Mexico. Instances of this, in fact, are very common among the American
aborigines, and no doubt many words were thus preserved which could not
be analyzed to their radicals through the popular tongue.

Or, if it is essential to find a meaning, why not accept the obvious
signification of the name? _Ma_ is the negative "no," "not;" _ya_ means
rough, fatiguing, difficult, painful, dangerous. The compound _maya_ is
given in the Dictionary of Motul with the translations "not arduous nor
severe; something easy and not difficult to do;" _cosa no grave ni
recia; cosa facil y no dificultosa de hacer_. It was used adjectively as
in the phrase, _maya u chapahal_, his sickness is not dangerous. So they
might have spoken of the level and fertile land of Yucatan, abounding in
fruit and game, that land to which we are told they delighted to give,
as a favorite appellation, the term _u luumil ceh, u luumil cutz_, the
land of the deer, the land of the wild turkey; of this land, I say, they
might well have spoken as of one not fatiguing, not rough nor
exhausting.


§ 2. _The Maya Linguistic Family._

Whatever the primitive meaning and first application of the name Maya,
it is now used to signify specifically the aborigines of Yucatan. In a
more extended sense, in the expression "the Maya family," it is
understood to embrace all tribes, wherever found, who speak related
dialects presumably derived from the same ancient stock as the Maya
proper.

Other names for this extended family have been suggested, as Maya-Kiche,
Mam-Huastec, and the like, compounded of the names of two or more of the
tribes of the group. But this does not appear to have much advantage
over the simple expression I have given, though "Maya-Kiche" may be
conveniently employed to prevent confusion.

These affiliated tribes are, according to the investigations of Dr. Carl
Hermann Berendt, the following:--

   1. The Maya proper, including the Lacandons.

   2. The Chontals of Tabasco, on and near the coast west of the mouth
      of the Usumacinta.

   3. The Tzendals, south of the Chontals.

   4. The Zotzils, south of the Tzendals.

   5. The Chaneabals, south of the Zotzils.

   6. The Chols, on the upper Usumacinta.

   7. The Chortis, near Copan.

   8. The Kekchis, and

   9. The Pocomchis, in Vera Paz.

  10. The Pocomams.    }

  11. The Mams.        }

  12. The Kiches.      }

  13. The Ixils.       }   In or bordering on Guatemala.

  14. The Cakchiquels. }

  15. The Tzutuhils.   }

  16. The Huastecs, on the Panuco river and its tributaries, in Mexico.

The languages of these do not differ more, in their extremes, than the
French, Spanish, Italian and other tongues of the so-called Latin races;
while a number resemble each other as closely as the Greek dialects of
classic times.

What lends particular importance to the study of this group of languages
is that it is that which was spoken by the race in several respects the
most civilized of any found on the American continent. Copan, Uxmal and
Palenque are names which at once evoke the most earnest interest in the
mind of every one who has ever been attracted to the subject of the
archæology of the New World. This race, moreover, possessed an abundant
literature, preserved in written books, in characters which were in some
degree phonetic. Enough of these remain to whet, though not to satisfy,
the curiosity of the student.

The total number of Indians of pure blood speaking the Maya proper may
be estimated as nearly or quite 200,000, most of them in the political
limits of the department of Yucatan; to these should be added nearly
100,000 of mixed blood, or of European descent, who use the tongue in
daily life.[19-1] For it forms one of the rare examples of American
languages possessing vitality enough not only to maintain its own
ground, but actually to force itself on European settlers and supplant
their native speech. It is no uncommon occurrence in Yucatan, says Dr.
Berendt, to find whole families of pure white blood who do not know one
word of Spanish, using the Maya exclusively. It has even intruded on
literature, and one finds it interlarded in books published in Merida,
very much as lady novelists drop into French in their imaginative
effusions.[20-1]

The number speaking the different dialects of the stock are roughly
estimated at half a million, which is probably below the mark.


§ 3. _Origin of the Maya Tribes._

The Mayas did not claim to be autochthones. Their legends referred to
their arrival by the sea from the East, in remote times, under the
leadership of Itzamna, their hero-god, and also to a less numerous,
immigration from the west, from Mexico, which was connected with the
history of another hero-god, Kukul Càn.

The first of these appears to be wholly mythical, and but a repetition
of the story found among so many American tribes, that their ancestors
came from the distant Orient. I have elsewhere explained this to be but
a solar or light myth.[20-2]

The second tradition deserves more attention from the historian, as it
is supported by some of their chronicles and by the testimony of several
of the most intelligent natives of the period of the conquest, which I
present on a later page of this volume.

It cannot be denied that the Mayas, the Kiches and the Cakchiquels, in
their most venerable traditions, claimed to have migrated from the north
or west, from some part of the present country of Mexico.

These traditions receive additional importance from the presence on the
shores of the Mexican Gulf, on the waters of the river Panuco, north of
Vera Cruz, of a prominent branch of the Maya family, the _Huastecs_. The
idea suggests itself that these were the rearguard of a great migration
of the Maya family from the north toward the south.

Support is given to this by their dialect, which is most closely akin to
that of the Tzendals of Tabasco, the nearest Maya race to the south of
them, and also by very ancient traditions of the Aztecs.

It is noteworthy that these two partially civilized races, the Mayas and
the Aztecs, though differing radically in language, had legends which
claimed a community of origin in some indefinitely remote past. We find
these on the Maya side narrated in the sacred book of the Kiches, the
_Popol Vuh_, in the Cakchiquel _Records of Tecpan Atitlan_, and in
various pure Maya sources which I bring forward in this volume. The
Aztec traditions refer to the Huastecs, and a brief analysis of them
will not be out of place.

At a very remote period the Mexicans, under their leader Mecitl, from
whom they took their name, arrived in boats at the mouth of the river
Panuco, at the place called Panotlan, which name means "where one
arrives by sea." With them were the Olmecs under their leader Olmecatl,
the Huastecs, under their leader Huastecatl, the Mixtecs and others.
They journeyed together and in friendship southward, down the coast,
quite to the volcanoes of Guatemala, thence to Tamoanchan, which is
described as the terrestial[TN-1] paradise, and afterwards, some of them
at least, northward and eastward, toward the shores of the Gulf.

On this journey the intoxicating beverage made from the maguey, called
_octli_ by the Aztecs, _cii_ by the Mayas, and _pulque_ by the
Spaniards, was invented by a woman whose name was _Mayauel_, in which we
can scarcely err in recognizing the national appellation _Maya_.[23-1]
Furthermore, the invention is closely related to the history of the
Huastecs. Their leader, alone of all the chieftains, drank to excess,
and in his drunkenness threw aside his garments and displayed his
nakedness. When he grew sober, fear and shame impelled him to collect
all those who spoke his language, and leaving the other tribes, he
returned to the neighborhood of Panuco and settled there
permanently.[23-2]

The annals of the Aztecs contain frequent allusions to the Huastecs. The
most important contest between the two nations took place in the reign
of Montezuma the First (1440-1464). The attack was made by the Aztecs,
for the alleged reason that the Huastecs had robbed and killed Aztec
merchants on their way to the great fairs in Guatemala. The Huastecs are
described as numerous, dwelling in walled towns, possessing quantities
of maize, beans, feathers and precious stones, and painting their faces.
They were signally defeated by the troops of Montezuma, but not reduced
to vassalage.[24-1]

At the time of the Conquest the province of the Huastecs was densely
peopled; "none more so under the sun," remarks the Augustinian friar
Nicolas de Witte, who visited it in 1543; but even then he found it
almost deserted and covered with ruins, for, a few years previous, the
Spaniards had acted towards its natives with customary treachery and
cruelty. They had invited all the chiefs to a conference, had enticed
them into a large wooden building, and then set fire to it and burned
them alive. When this merciless act became known the Huastecs deserted
their villages and scattered among the forests and mountains.[24-2]

These traditions go to show that the belief among the Aztecs was that
the tribes of the Maya family came originally from the north or
northeast, and were at some remote period closely connected with their
own ancestors.


§ 4. _Political Condition at the Time of the Conquest._

When the Spaniards first explored the coasts of Yucatan they found the
peninsula divided into a number of independent petty states. According
to an authority followed by Herrera, these were eighteen in number.
There is no complete list of their names, nor can we fix with certainty
their boundaries. The following list gives their approximate position.
On the west coast, beginning at the south--

   1. _Acalan_, on the Bahia de Terminos.
   2. _Tixchel_ (or Telchac?)
   3. _Champoton_ (Chakanputun, or Potonchan).
   4. _Kinpech_ (Campech or Campeche).
   5. _Canul_ (Acanul or H' Canul).
   6. _Hocabaihumun._
   7. _Cehpech_, in which Merida was founded.
   8. _Zipatan_, on the northwest coast.

On the east coast, beginning at the north--

   9. _Choaca_, near Cape Cotoche.
  10. _Ekab_, opposite the Island of Cozumel.
  11. _Conil_, or of the Cupuls.[TN-3]
  13. _Bakhalal_, or Bacalar.
  14. _Chetemal._
  15. _Taitza_, the Peten district.

Central provinces--

  16. _H' Chel_ (or Ah Kin Chel) in which Itzamal
       was located.
  17. _Zotuta_, of the Cocoms.
  18. _Mani_, of the Xius.
  19. _Cochuah_ (or Cochva, or Cocolá), the principal
       town of which was Ichmul.

As No. 15, the Peten district, was not conquered by the Spaniards until
1697, it was doubtless not included in the list drawn up by Herrera's
authority, so that the above would correspond with his statement.

Each of these provinces was ruled by a hereditary chief, who was called
_batab_, or _batabil uinic_ (_uinic_=man). He sometimes bore two names,
the first being that of his mother, the second of his father, as _Can
Ek_, in which _Can_ was from the maternal, _Ek_ from the paternal line.
The surname (_kaba_) descended through the male. It was called _hach
kaba_, the true name, or _hool kaba_, the head name. Much attention was
paid to preserving the genealogy, and the word for "of noble birth" was
_ah kaba_, "he who has a name."

Each village of a province was organized under a ruler, who was styled
_halach uinic_, the true or real man. Frequently he was a junior member
of the reigning family. He was assisted by a second in command, termed
_ah kulel_, as a lieutenant, and various subordinate officials, whose
duties will be explained in the notes to Nakuk Pech's narrative.

Personal tenure of land did not exist. The town lands were divided out
annually among the members of the community, as their wants required,
the consumption of each adult being calculated at twenty loads (of a
man) of maize each year, this being the staple food.[27-1]


§ 5. _Grammatical Observations._

Compared with many American languages, the Maya is simple in
construction. It is analytic rather than synthetic; most of its roots
are monosyllables or dissyllables, and the order of their arrangement is
very similar to that in English. It has been observed that foreigners,
coming to Yucatan, ignorant of both Spanish and Maya, acquire a
conversational knowledge of the latter more readily than of the
former.[28-1]

An examination of the language explains this. Neither nouns nor
adjectives undergo any change for gender, number or case. Before animate
nouns the gender may be indicated by the prefixes _ah_ and _ix_,
equivalent to the English _he_ and _she_ in such expressions as
_he-bear_, _she-bear_. The plural particle is _ob_, which can be
suffixed to animate nouns, but is in fact the third person plural of the
personal pronoun.

The conjugations of the verbs are four in number. All passives and
neuters end in _l_, and also a certain number of active verbs; these
form the first conjugation, while the remaining three are of active
verbs only. The time-forms of the verb are three, the present, the
aorist, and the future. Taking the verb _nacal_, to ascend, these forms
are _nacal_, _naci_, _nacac_. The present indicative is:--

  Nacal in cah,             I ascend.
  Nacal á cah,              thou ascendest.
  Nacal ú cah,              he ascends.
  Nacal c cah,              we ascend.
  Nacal a cah ex,           you ascend.
  Nacal u cah ob,           they ascend.

When this form is analyzed, we discover that _in_, _á_, _ú_, _c_,
_a-ex_, _u-ob_, are personal possessive pronouns, my, thy, his, our,
your, their; and that _nacal_ and _cah_ are in fact verbal nouns
standing in apposition. _Cah_, which is the sign of the present tense,
means the doing, making, being occupied or busy at something. Hence
_nacal in cah_, I ascend, is literally "the ascent, my being occupied
with." The imperfect tense is merely the present with the additional
verbal noun _cuchi_ added, as--

  Nacal in cah cuchi,       I was ascending.
  Nacal á cah cuchi,        Thou wast ascending.
                                   etc.

_Cuchi_ means carrying on, bearing along, and the imperfect may thus be
rendered:--

"The ascent, my being occupied with, carrying on."

This is what has been called by Friedrich Müller the "possessive
conjugation," the pronoun used being not in the nominative but in the
possessive form.

The aorist presents a different mode of formation:--

  Nac-en, (i.e. Naci-en)    I ascended.
  Nac-ech,                  Thou ascended.
  Naci,                     He ascended.
  Nac-on,                   We ascended.
  Nac-ex,                   You ascended.
  Nac-ob,                   They ascended.

Here _en_, _ech_, _on_, _ex_, are apparently the simple personal
pronouns I, thou, we, you, and are used predicatively. The future is
also conjugated in this form by the use of the verbal _bin_, _binel_, to
go:

  Bin nacac en,             I am going to ascend.
  Bin nacac ech,            Thou art going to ascend.
                                         etc.

The present of all the active verbs uses this predicative form, while
their aorists and futures employ possessive forms. Thus:--

  Ten cambezic,             I teach him.
  Tech cambezic,            Thou teaches him.
  Lay cambezic,             He teaches him.

Here, however, I must note a difference of opinion between eminent
grammatical critics. Friedrich Müller considers all such forms as--

  Nac-en,                   I ascended,

to exhibit "the predicative power of the true verb," basing his opinion
on the analogy of such expressions as--

  Ten batab en,             I (am) a chief.[31-1]

M. Lucien Adam, on the other hand, says:--"The intransitive preterit
_nac-en_ may seem morphologically the same as the Aryan _ás-mi_; but
here again, _nac_ is a verbal noun, as is demonstrated by the plural of
the third person _nac-ob_, 'the ascenders.' _Nac-en_ comes to mean
'ascender [formerly] me.'"[31-2]

I am inclined to think that the French critic is right, and that, in
fact, there is no true verb in the Maya, but merely verbal nouns,
_nomina actionis_, to which the pronouns stand either in the possessive
or objective relations, or, more remotely, in the possessive relation to
another verbal noun in apposition, as _cah_, _cuchi_, etc. The
importance of this point in estimating the structure of the language
will be appreciated by those who have paid any attention to the science
of linguistics.

The objective form of the conjugation is composed of the simple personal
pronouns of both persons, together with the possessive of the agent and
the particle _ci_, which conveys the accessory notion of present action
towards. Thus, from _moc_, to tie:--

  Ten c in moc ech,         I tie thee,
         literally,         I my present tying thee.

These refinements of analysis have, of course, nothing to do with the
convenience of the language for practical purposes. As it has no dual,
no inclusive and exclusive plurals, no articles nor substantive verb, no
transitions, and few irregular verbs, its forms are quickly learned. It
is not polysynthetic, at any rate, not more so than French, and its
words undergo no such alteration by agglutination as in Aztec and
Algonkin. Syncopated forms are indeed common, but to no greater extent
than in colloquial English. The unit of the tongue remains the word, not
the sentence, and we find no immeasurable words, expressing in
themselves a whole paragraph, such as grammarians like to quote from the
Eskimo, Aztec, Qquichua and other highly synthetic languages.

The position of words in a sentence is not dissimilar from that in
English. The adjective precedes the noun it qualifies, and sentences
usually follow the formula, subject--verbal--object. Thus:--

  _Hemac cu  yacuntic  Diose,       utz  uinic._
   He    who   loves    God,  [is]  good  man.

But transposition is allowable, as--

  _Taachili    u tzicic    u    yum     uinic._
   Generally     obeys    his   father, a man.

As shown in this last example, the genitive relation is indicated by the
possessive pronoun, as it sometimes was in English, "John, his book;"
but the Maya is "his book John," _u huun Juan_.

Another method which is used for indicating the genitive and ablative
relations is the termination _il_. This is called "the determinative
ending," and denotes whose is the object named, or of what. It is
occasionally varied to _al_ and _el_, to correspond to the last
preceding vowel, but this "vocalic echo" is not common in Maya. While it
denotes use, it does not convey the idea of ownership. Thus, _u cħeen in
yum_, my father's well, means the well that belongs to my father; but
_cħenel in yum_, my father's well, means the well from which he obtains
water, but in which he has no proprietorship. Material used is indicated
by this ending, as _xanil na_, a house of straw (_xan_, straw, _na_,
house).

Compound words are frequent, but except occasional syncope, the members
of the compound undergo no change. There is little resembling the
incapsulation (_emboitement_) that one sees in most American languages.
Thus, midnight, _chumucakab_, is merely a union of _chumuc_, middle, and
_akab_, night; dawn, _ahalcab_, is _ahal_, to awaken, _cab_, the world.

While from the above brief sketch it will be seen that the Maya is free
from many of the difficulties which present themselves in most American
tongues, it is by no means devoid of others.

In its _phonetics_, it possesses six elements which to the Spaniards
were new. They are represented by the signs:

  cħ,   k,   pp,   tħ,  tz,   ɔ.

Of these the cħ resembles dch, pronounced forcibly; the ɔ is as dz; the
pp is a forcible double p; and in the tħ the two letters are to be
pronounced separately and forcibly. There remains the _k_ which is the
most difficult of all. It is a sort of palato-guttural, the only one in
the language, and its sound can only be acquired by long practice.

The _particles_ are very numerous, and make up the life of the language.
By them are expressed the relations of space and time, and all the finer
shades of meaning. Probably no one not to the manor born could render
correctly their full force. Buenaventura, in his Grammar, enumerates
sixteen different significations of the particle _il_.[35-1]

The elliptical and obscure style adopted by most native writers, partly
from ignorance of the art of composition, partly because they imitated
the mystery in expression affected by their priests, forms a serious
obstacle even to those fairly acquainted with the current language.
Moreover, the older manuscripts contain both words and forms unfamiliar
to a cultivated Yucatecan of to-day.

I must, however, not omit to contradict formally an assertion made by
the traveler Waldeck, and often repeated, that the language has
undergone such extensive changes that what was written a century ago is
unintelligible to a native of to-day. So far is this from the truth
that, except for a few obsolete words, the narrative of the Conquest,
written more than three hundred years ago, by the chief Pech, which I
print in this volume, could be read without much difficulty by any
educated native.

Again, as in all languages largely monosyllabic, there are many
significations attached to one word, and these often widely different.
Thus _kab_ means, a hand; a handle; a branch; sap; an offence; while
_cab_ means the world; a country; strength; honey; a hive; sting of an
insect; juice of a plant; and, in composition, promptness. It will be
readily understood that cases will occur where the context leaves it
doubtful which of these meanings is to be chosen.

These _homonyms_ and _paronyms_, as they are called by grammarians,
offer a fine field for sciolists in philology, wherein to discover
analogies between the Maya and other tongues, and they have been
vigorously culled out for that purpose. All such efforts are
inconsistent with correct methods in linguistics. The folly of the
procedure may be illustrated by comparing the English and the Maya. I
suppose no one will pretend that these languages, at any rate in their
present modern forms, are related. Yet the following are but a few of
the many verbal similarities that could be pointed out:--

  MAYA.        ENGLISH.
  bateel,      battle.
  cħab,        to grab, to take.
  hol,         hole.
  hun,         one.
  lum,         loam.
  pol,         poll (head).
  potum,       a pot.
  pul,         to pull, carry.
  tun,         stone.

So with the Latin we could find such similarities as _volah_=volo,
_ɔa_=dare, etc.

In fact, no relationship of the Maya linguistic group to any other has
been discovered. It contains a number of words borrowed from the Aztec
(Nahuatl); and the latter in turn presents many undoubtedly borrowed
from the Maya dialects. But this only goes to show that these two great
families had long and close relations; and that we already know, from
their history, traditions and geographical positions.


§ 6. _The Numeral System._

The Mayas had a mathematical turn, and possessed a developed system of
numeration. It counted by units and scores; in other words, it was a
vigesimal system. The cardinal numbers were:--

  Hun,           one.
  Ca,            two.
  Ox,            three.
  Can,           four.
  Ho,            five.
  Uac,           six.
  Uuc,           seven.
  Uaxac,         eight.
  Bolon,         nine.
  Lahun,         ten.
  Buluc,         eleven.
  Lahca,         twelve.
  Oxlahun,       thirteen.
  Canlahun,      fourteen.
  Holhun,        fifteen.
  Uaclahun,      sixteen.
  Uuclahun,      seventeen.
  Uaxaclahun,    eighteen.
  Bolonlahun,    nineteen.
  Hunkal,        twenty.

The composition of these numerals from twelve to nineteen inclusive is
easily seen. _Lahun_ is apparently a compound of _lah hun_ (sc.
_uinic_), "it finishes one (man);" that is, in counting on the fingers.
_Lah_ means the end, to end, and also the whole of anything. _Kal_, a
score, is literally a fastening together, a shutting up, from the verb
_kal_, to shut, to lock, to button up, etc.

From twenty upward, the scores are used:--

  Hun tu kal,    one to the score, 21.
  Ca tu kal,     two to the score, 22.
  Ox tu kal,   three to the score, 23,

and so on up to

  Ca kal,               two score, 40.

Above forty, three different methods can be used to continue the
numeration.

1. We may continue the same employed between 20 and 40, thus:--

  Hun tu cakal,               one to two score, 41.
  Ca tu cakal,                two to two score, 42.
  Ox tu cakal,              three to two score, 43,

and so on.

2. The numeral copulative _catac_ can be used, with the numeral particle
_tul_; as:--

  Cakal catac catul,         two score and two, 42.
  Cakal catac oxtul,       two score and three, 43.

3. We may count upon the next score above, as:

  Hun tu yoxkal,        one on the third score, 41.
  Ca tu yoxkal,         two on the third score, 42.
  Ox tu yoxkal,       three on the third score, 43.

The last mentioned system is that advanced by Father Beltran, and is the
only one formally mentioned by him. It has recently been carefully
analyzed by Prof. Leon de Rosny, who has shown that it is a consistent
vigesimal method.[40-1]

It might be asked, and the question is pertinent, and is left unanswered
by Prof. Leon de Rosny, why _hun tu kal_ means "one to the score," and
_hun tu can kal_ is translated, "one on the fourth score." This
important shade of meaning may be given, I think, by the possessive _u_
which originally belonged in the phrase, but suffered elision. Properly
it should be,

  Hun tu u can kal.

This seems apparent from other numbers where it has not suffered
elision, but merely incorporation, as:--

  Hun tu yox kal=hun tu u ox kal, 41.
  Hu tu yokal=hun tu u ho kal, 81.

This system of numeration, advanced by Beltran, appears to have been
adopted by all of the later writers, who may have learned the Maya
largely from his Grammar. Thus, in the translation of the Gospel of St.
John, published by the Baptist Bible Translation Society, chap. II, v.
20; _Xupan uactuyoxkal hab utial u mental letile kulnaa_, "forty and six
years was this temple in building;"[41-1] and in that of the Gospel of
St. Luke, said to have been the work of Father Joaquin Ruz, the same
system is followed.[41-2]

Nevertheless, Beltran's method has been severely criticised by Don Juan
Pio Perez, who ranks among the ablest Yucatecan linguists of this
century. He has pronounced it artificial, not in accordance with either
the past or present use of the natives themselves, and built up out of
an effort to assimilate the Maya to the Latin numeral system.

I give his words in the original, from his unpublished essay on Maya
grammar.[42-1]

"Los Indios de Yucatan cuentan por veintenas, que llaman _kal_ y en
cierto modo tienen diez y nueve unidades hasta completar la primera
veintena que es _hunkal_ aunque en el curso de esta solo se encuentran
once numeros simples, pues los nombres de los restantes se forman de los
de la primera decena.

"Para contar de una à otra veintena los numeros fraccionarios ò las diez
y nueve unidades, terminadas por la particula _tul_ ò su sincopa
_tu_,[42-2] se juntan antepuestas à la veintena espresada; por exemplo,
_hunkal_, 20; _huntukal_, 21; _catukal_, 22; y _huntucakal_, 41;
_catucakal_, 42; _oxtucankal_, 83; _cantuhokal_, 140, etc.

"El Padre Fr. Beltran de Santa Rosa, como puede verse en su _Arte de
Lengua Maya_, formó un sistema distinto à este desde la 2ª veintena
hasta la ultima, pues para espresar las unidades entre este y la 3ª
veintena pone à esta terminandolas y por consiguiente rebajandole su
valor por solo su anteposicion à dichas unidades fraccionarias, y asi
para espresar el numero 45 por ejemplo dice _ho tu yoxkal_, cuando
_oxkal_ ò _yoxkal_ significa 60.

"No sé de donde tomó los fundamentos en que se apoya este sistema, quiza
en el uso de su tiempo, que no ha llegado hasta este; aunque he visto en
varios manuscritos antiguos, que los Indios de entonces como los de
ahora, usaban el sistema que indico, y espresaban las unidades integras
que numeraban, y para espresar el numero 65 dicen; _Oxkal catac hotul_ ù
_hotu oxkal_, que usa el Padre Beltran por 45.[43-1]

"Mas el metodo que explico esta apoyado en el uso y aun en el curso que
se advierte en la 1ª y 2ª veintena é indican que asi deben continuar las
decenas hasta la 20ª y no formar sistemas confusos que por ser mas ô
menos análogos à la numeracion romana lo juzgaban mas ô menos perfectos,
porque la consideraban como un tipo a que debia arreglarse cualquiera
otra lengua, cuando en ellas todo lo que no este conforme con el uso
recibido y corriente, es construir castillos en el aire y hacer reformas
que por mas ingeniosas que sean, no pasan de inoficiosas."

In the face of this severe criticism of Father Beltran's system, I
cannot explain how it is that in Pio Perez's own Dictionary of the Maya,
the numerals above 40 are given according to Beltran's system; and that
this was not the work of the editors of that volume (which was published
after his death), is shown by an autographic manuscript of his
dictionary in my possession, written about 1846,[44-1] in which also the
numerals appear in Beltran's form.

Three other manuscript dictionaries in my collection, all composed
previous to 1690, affirm the system of Beltran, and I am therefore
obliged to believe that it was authentic and current among the natives
long before white scholars began to dress up their language in the
ill-fitting garments of Aryan grammar.

Proceeding to higher numbers, it is interesting to note that they also
proceed on the vigesimal system, although this has not heretofore been
distinctly shown. The ancient computation was:

  20 units   = one _kal_                   =         20
  20 kal     = one _bak_                   =        400
  20 bak     = one _pic_                   =      8,000
  20 pic     = one _calab_                 =    160,000
  20 calab   = one _kinchil_ or _tzotzceh_ =  3,200,000
  20 kinchil = one _alau_                  = 64,000,000

This ancient system was obscured by the Spaniards using the word _pic_
to mean 1000 and _kinchil_ to mean 1,000,000, instead of their original
significations.

The meaning of _kal_, I have already explained to be a fastening
together, a package, a bundle. _Bak_, as a verb, is to tie around and
around with a network of cords; _pic_ is the old word for the short
petticoat worn by the women, which was occasionally used as a sac. If we
remember that grains of corn or of cacao were what were generally
employed as counters, then we may suppose these were measures of
quantity. The word _kal_ (_qal_), in Kiche means a score and also
specifically 20 grains of cacao; _bak_ in Cakchiquel means a corn-cob,
and as a verb to shell an ear of corn, but I am not clear of any
connection between this and the numeral. Other meanings of _bak_ in Maya
are "meat" and the _partes pudendas_ of either sex.

_Calab_, seems to be an instrumental form from _cal_, to stuff, to fill
full.[45-1] The word _calam_ is used in the sense of excessive,
overmuch. In Cakchiquel the phrase _mani hu cala_, not (merely) one
_cala_, is synonymous with _mani hu chuvi_, not (merely) one bag or
sack, both meaning a countless number.[46-1] In that dialect the
specific meaning of _cala_ is 20 loads of cacao beans.[46-2]

The term _tzotzceh_ means deerskin, but for _kinchil_ and _alau_, I have
found no satisfactory derivation that does not strain the forms of the
word too much. I would, however, suggest one possible connection of
meaning.

In _kinchil_, we have the word _kin_, day; in _alau_, the word _u_
month, and in the term for mathematical infinity, _hunhablat_, we find
_hun haab_, one year, just as in the related expression, _hunhablazic_,
which signifies that which lasts a whole year. If this suggestion is
well grounded, then in these highest expressions of quantity (and I am
inclined to think that originally _hun hablat_, one _hablat_=20 _alau_)
we have applications of the three time periods, the day, the month, and
the year, with the figurative sense that the increase of one over the
other was as the relative lengths of these different periods.

I think it worth while to go into these etymologies, as they may throw
some light on the graphic representation of the numerals in the Maya
hieroglyphics. It is quite likely that the figures chosen to represent
the different higher units would resemble the objects which their names
literally signify. The first nineteen numerals were written by a
combination of dots and lines, examples of which we find in abundance in
the Codex Troano and other manuscripts. The following explanation of it
is from the pen of a native writer in the last century:--

[Illustration]

"Yantac thun yetel paiche tu pachob, he hunppel thune hunppel bin haabe,
uaix cappele cappel bin haabe, uaix oxppel thuun, ua canppel thuune,
canppel binbe, uaix oxppel thuun baixan; he paichee yan yokol xane, ua
hunppel paichee, hoppel haab bin; ua cappel paichee lahunppiz bin; uaix
hunppel paichee yan yokol xane, ua yan hunppel thuune uacppel bin be;
uaix cappel thuune yan yokol paichee uucppel bin be; ua oxppel thuun yan
yokole, uaxppel binbe; uaixcanppel thun yan yokole paichee (bolonppel
binbe); yanix thun yokol (cappel) paichee buluc piz; uaix cappel thune
lahcapiz; ua oxppel thuun, oxlahunpiz."

"They (our ancestors) used (for numerals in their calendars) dots and
lines back of them; one dot for one year, two dots for two years, three
dots for three, four dots for four, and so on; in addition to these they
used a line; one line meant five years, two lines ten years; if one line
and above it one dot, six years; if two dots above the line, seven
years; if three dots above, eight; if four dots above the line, nine; a
dot above two lines, eleven; if two dots, twelve; if three dots,
thirteen."[48-1]

The plan of using the numerals in Maya differs somewhat from that in
English.

In the first place, they are rarely named without the addition of a
_numeral particle_, which is suffixed. These particles indicate the
character or class of the objects which are, or are about to be,
enumerated. When they are uttered, the hearer at once knows what kind of
objects are to be spoken of. Many of them can be traced to a meaning
which has a definite application to a class, and they have analogues in
European tongues. Thus I may say "seven head of"--and the hearer knows
that I am going to speak of cattle, or sheep, or cabbages, or similar
objects usually counted by heads. So in Maya _ac_ means a turtle or a
turtle shell; hence it is used as a particle in counting canoes, houses,
stools, vases, pits, caves, altars, and troughs, and some general
appropriateness can be seen; but when it is applied also to cornfields,
the analogy seems remote.

Of these numeral particles, not less than _seventy-six_ are given by
Beltran, in his Grammar, and he does not exhaust the list. Of these
_piz_ and _pel_, both of which mean, single, singly, are used in
counting years, and will frequently recur in the annals I present in
this volume.

By their aid another method of numeration was in vogue for counting
time. For "eighty-one years," they did not say _hutuyokal haab_, but
_can kal haab catac hunpel haab_, literally, "four score years and one
year." The copulative _catac_ is also used in adding a smaller number to
a _bak_, or 400, as for 450, _hun bak catac lahuyoxkal_, "one _bak_ and
ten toward the third score." _Catac_ is a compound of _ca tac_, _ca_
meaning "then" or "and," and _tac_, which Dr. Berendt considered to be
an irregular future of _talel_, to come, "then will come fifty," but
which may be the imperative of _tac_ (_tacah_, _tace_, third
conjugation), which means to put something under another, as in the
phrase _tac ex che yalan cum_, put you wood under the pot.

It will be seen that the latter method is by addition, the former by
subtraction. Another variety of the latter is found in the annals. For
instance, "ninety-nine years" is not expressed by _bolonlahutuyokal
haab_, nor yet by _cankal haab catac bolonlahunpel haab_, but by _hunpel
haab minan ti hokal haab_, "one single year lacking from five score
years."


§ 7. _The Calendar._

The system of computing time adopted by the Mayas is a subject too
extensive to be treated here in detail, but it is indispensable, for the
proper understanding of their annals, that the outlines of their
chronological scheme be explained.

The year, _haab_, was intended to begin on the day of the transit of the
sun by the zenith, and was counted from July 16th. It was divided into
eighteen months, _u_ (_u_, month, moon), of twenty days, _kin_ (sun,
day, time), each. The days were divided into groups of five, as
follows:--

  1. _Kan._       6. _Muluc._  11. _Ix._      16. _Cauac._
  2. Chicchan.    7. Oc.       12. Men.       17. Ahau.
  3. Cimi.        8. Chuen.    13. Cib.       18. Imix.
  4. Manik.       9. Eb.       14. Caban.     19. Ik.
  5. Lamat.      10. Ben.      15. Eɔnab.     20. Akbal.

The months, in their order, were:--

   1. Pop.
   2. Uo.
   3. Zip.
   4. Zoɔ.
   5. Zeec.
   6. Xul.
   7. Ɔe-yaxkin.
   8. Mol.
   9. Chen.
  10. Yaax.
  11. Zac.
  12. Ceh.
  13. Mac.
  14. Kankin.
  15. Moan.
  16. Pax.
  17. Kayab.
  18. Cumku.

As the Maya year was of 365 days, and as 18 months of 20 days each
counted only 360 days, there were five days intervening between the last
of the month Cumku and the first day of the following year. These were
called "days without names," _xma kaba kin_ (_xma_, without, _kaba_,
names, _kin_, days), an expression not quite correct, as they were named
in regular order, only they were not counted in any month.

It will be seen, by glancing at the list of days, that this arrangement
brought at the beginning of each year, the days Kan, Muluc, Ix and Cauac
in turn, and that no other days could begin the year. These days were
therefore called _cuch haab_, "the bearers of the years" (_cuch_, to
bear, carry, _haab_, year), and years were distinguished as "a year
Kan," "a year Muluc," etc., as they began with one or another of these
"year bearers."

But the calendar was not so simple as this. The days were not counted
from one to twenty, and then beginning at one again, and so on, but by
periods of 13 days each. Thus, in the first month, beginning with 1 Kan,
the 14th day of that month begins a new "week," as it has been called,
and is named 1 Caban. Twenty-eight of these weeks make 364 days, thus
leaving one day to complete the year. When the number of these odd days
amounted to 13, in other words when thirteen years had elapsed, this
formed a period which was called "the _katun_ of days," _kin katun_, and
by Spanish writers an "indiction."

It will be readily observed by an inspection of the following table,
that four of these indictions, in other words 52 years, will elapse
before a "year bearer" of the same name and number recommences a year.

  ___________________________________________________________
      _1st year._ | _14th year._ | _27th year._ | _40th year_[TN-5]
  -----------------------------------------------------------
   1 |  Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac
   2 |  Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan
   3 |  Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc
   4 |  Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix
   5 |  Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac
   6 |  Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan
   7 |  Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc
   8 |  Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix
   9 |  Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac
  10 |  Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan
  11 |  Ix        |    Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc
  12 |  Cauac     |    Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix
  13 |  Kan       |    Muluc     |    Ix        |    Cauac.
  -----------------------------------------------------------

A cycle of 52 years was thus obtained in a manner almost identical with
that of the Aztecs, Tarascos and other nations.

But the Mayas took an important step in advance of all their
contemporaries in arranging a much longer cycle.

This long cycle was an application of the vigesimal system to their
reckoning of time. Twenty days were a month, _u_ or _uinal_; twenty
years was a cycle, _katun_. To ask one's age the question was put
_haypel u katunil_? How many katuns have you? And the answer was,
_hunpel katun_, one katun (twenty years), or, _hopel in katunil_, I am
five katuns, or a hundred years old, as the case might be.

The division of the katuns was on the principle of the Beltran system of
numeration (see page 40), as,

  _xel u ca katun_,      thirty years.
  _xel u yox katun_,      fifty years.

Literally these expressions are, "dividing the second katun," "dividing
the third katun," _xel_ meaning to cut in pieces, to divide as with a
knife. They may be compared to the German _dritthalb_, two and a half,
or "the third a half."[54-1]

The Katun of 20 years was divided into five lesser divisions of 4 years
each, called _tzuc_, a word with a signification something like the
English "bunch," and which came to be used as a numeral particle in
counting parts, divisions, paragraphs, reasons, groups of towns,
etc.[54-2]

These _tzuc_ were called by the Spaniards _lustros_, from the Latin
_lustrum_, although that was a period _five_ years. Cogolludo says:
"They counted their eras and ages, which they entered in their books, by
periods of 20 years each, and by _lustros_ of four years each. The first
year they placed in the East [that is, on the Katun-wheel, and in the
figures in their books], calling it _cuch haab_; the second in the West,
called _Hijx_; the third in the South, _Cavac_; and the fourth, Muluc,
in the North, and this served them for the Dominical letter. When five
of the _lustros_ had passed, that is 20 years, they called it a _Katun_,
and they placed one carved stone upon another, cemented with lime and
sand, in the walls of their temples, or in the houses of their
priests."[55-1]

The historian is wrong in saying that the first year was called
_cuchhaab_; that was the name applied to all the Dominical days, and as
I have said, means "year bearer." The first year was called _Kan_, from
the first day of its first month.

This is but one of many illustrations of how cautious we must be in
accepting any statement of the early Spanish writers about the usages of
the natives.

There is, however, some obscurity about the length of the _Katun_. All
the older Spanish writers, without exception, and most of the native
manuscripts, speak of it distinctly as a period of twenty years. Yet
there are three manuscripts of high authority in the Maya which state
that it embraced twenty-four years, although the last four were not
reckoned. This theory was adopted and warmly advocated by Pio Perez, in
his essay on the ancient chronology of Yucatan, and is also borne out by
calculations which have been made on the hieroglyphic Codex Troano, by
M. Delaporte, in France, and Professor Cyrus Thomas, in the United
States.[56-1]

This discrepancy may arise from the custom of counting the katuns by two
different systems, ground for which supposition is furnished by various
manuscripts; but for purposes of chronology and ordinary life, it will
be evident that the writers of the annals in the present volume adopted
the Katun of twenty years' length; while on the other hand the native
Pech, in his History of the Conquest, which is the last piece in the
volume, gives for the beginning and the end of the Katun the years
1517-1541, and therefore must have had in mind one of twenty-four years'
duration. The solution of these contradictions is not yet at hand.

This great cycle of 13 × 20=260 years was called an _ahau Katun_
collectively, and each period in it bore the same name.

This name, _ahau Katun_, deserves careful analysis. _Ahau_ is the
ordinary word for chief, king, ruler. It is probably a compound of _ah_,
which is the male prefix and sign of the _nomen agentis_, and _u_,
collar, a collar of gold or other precious substance, distinguishing the
chiefs. _Katun_ has been variously analyzed. Don Pio Perez supposed it
was a compound of _kat_, to ask, and _tun_, a stone, because at the
close of these periods they set up the sculptured stone, which was
afterwards referred to in order to fix the dates of occurrences.[57-1]
This, however, would certainly require that _kat_ be in the passive,
_katal_ or _kataan_, and would give _katantun_. Beltran in his Grammar
treats the word as an adjective, meaning very long, perpetual.[57-2] But
this is a later, secondary sense. Its usual signification is a body or
batallion[TN-7] of warriors engaged in action. As a verb, it is to
fight, to give battle, and thus seems related to the Cakchiquel _[k]at_,
to cut, or wound, to make prisoner.[58-1] The series of years, ordered
and arranged under a controlling day and date, were like a row of
soldiers commanded by a chief, and hence the name _ahau katun_.

Each of these _ahaus_ or chiefs of the Katuns was represented in the
native calendars by the picture or portrait of a particular personage
who in some way was identified with the Katun, and his name was given to
it. This has not been dwelt upon nor even mentioned by previous writers
on the subject, but I have copies of various native manuscripts which
illustrate it, and give the names of each of the rulers of the Katuns.

The thirteen _ahau katuns_ were not numbered from 1 upward, but
beginning at the 13th, by the alternate numbers, in the following
order:--

  13, 11, 9, 7, 5, 3, 1, 12, 10, 8, 6, 4, 2

Various reasons have been assigned for this arrangement. It would be
foreign to my purpose to discuss them here, and I shall merely quote the
following, from a paper I wrote on the subject, printed in the _American
Naturalist_, Sept., 1881:--

     "Gallatin explained them as the numerical characters of the days
     "Ahau" following the first day of each year called Cauac; Dr.
     Valentini thinks they refer to the numbers of the various idols
     worshiped in the different Ahaus; Professor Thomas that they are
     the number of the year (in the indiction of 52 years) on which the
     Ahau begins. Each of these statements is true in itself, but each
     fails to show any practical use of the series; and of the last
     mentioned it is to be observed that the objection applies to it
     that at the commencement of an Ahau Katun the numbers would run 1,
     12, 10, 8, etc., whereas we know positively that the numbers of the
     Ahaus began with 13 and continued 11, 9, 7, 5, etc.

     "The explanation which I offer is that the number of the Ahau was
     taken from the last day Cauac preceding the Kan with which the
     first year of each Ahau began--for, as 24 is divisible by 4, the
     first year of each Ahau necessarily began with the day Kan. This
     number was the "ruling number" of the Ahau, and not for any
     mystical or ceremonial purpose, but for the practical one of at
     once and easily converting any year designated in the Ahau into its
     equivalent in the current Kin Katun, or 52 year cycle. All that is
     necessary to do this is, to _add the number of the year in the Ahau
     to the number of the year Cauac corresponding to this "ruling
     number." When the sum exceeds 52, subtract that number._

     "Take an example: To what year in the Kin Katun does 10 Ahau XI
     (the 10th year of the 11th Ahau) correspond?

     "On referring to a table, or, as the Mayas did, to a 'Katun wheel,'
     we find the 11th Cauac to be the 24th year of the cycle; add ten to
     this and we have 34 as the number of the year in the cycle to which
     10 Ahau XI corresponds. The great simplicity and convenience of
     this will be evident without further discussion."

The important question remains, how closely, by these cycles, did the
Mayas approximate to preserving the exact date of an event?

To answer this fairly, we should be sure that we have a perfectly
authentic translation of their hieroglyphic annals. It is doubtful that
we have. Those I present in this volume are the most perfect, so far as
I know, but they certainly do not agree among themselves. Can their
discrepancies be explained? I think they can in a measure (1) by the
differing length of the katuns, (2) by the era assumed as the
commencement of the reckoning.

It must be remembered that there was apparently no common era adopted by
the Mayas; each province may have selected its own; and it is quite
erroneous to condemn the annals off-hand for inaccuracy because they
conflict between themselves.


§ 8. _Ancient Hieroglyphic Books._

The Mayas were a literary people. They made frequent use of tablets,
wrote many books, and covered the walls of their buildings with
hieroglyphic signs, cut in the stones or painted upon the plaster.

The explanation of these signs is one of the leading problems in
American archæology. It was supposed to have been solved when the
manuscript of Bishop Landa's account of Yucatan was discovered, some
twenty years ago, in Madrid. The Bishop gave what he called "an A, B,
C," of the language, but which, when applied to the extant manuscripts
and the mural inscriptions, proved entirely insufficient to decipher
them.

The disappointment of the antiquaries was great, and by one of them, Dr.
Felipe Valentini, Landa's alphabet has been denounced as "a Spanish
fabrication."[61-1] But certainly any one acquainted with the history of
the Latin alphabet, how it required the labor of thousands of years and
the demands of three wholly different families of languages, to bring it
to its perfection, should not have looked to find among the Mayas, or
anywhere else, a parallel production of human intelligence. Moreover,
rightly understood, Landa does not intimate anything of the kind. He
distinctly states that what he gives are the sounds of the Spanish
letters as they would be transcribed in Maya characters; not at all that
they analyzed the sounds of their words and expressed the phonetic
elements in these characters. On the contrary, he takes care to affirm
that they could not do this, and gives an example in point.[62-1] Dr.
Valentini, therefore, was attacking a windmill, and entirely
misconstrued the Bishop's statements.

I shall not, in this connection, enter into a discussion of the nature
of these hieroglyphics. It is enough for my purpose to say that they
were recognized by the earliest Spanish explorers as quite different
from those of Mexico, and as the only graphic system on the continent,
so far as they knew it, which merited the name of writing.[62-2]

The word for book in Maya is _huun_, a monosyllable which reappears in
the Kiche _vuh_ and the Huasteca _uuh_. In Maya this initial _h_ is
almost silent and is occasionally dropped, as _yuunil Dios_, the book of
God (syncopated form of _u huunil Dios_, the suffix _il_ being the
"determinative" ending). I am inclined to believe that _huun_ is merely
a form of _uoohan_, something written, this being the passive participle
of _uooh_, to write, which, as a noun, also means a character, a
letter.[63-1]

Another name for their books, especially those containing the prophecies
and forecasts of the priestly diviners, is said to have been _anahte_;
or _analte_. This word is not to be found in any of the early
dictionaries. The usual authority for it is Villagutierre Sotomayor, who
describes these volumes as they were seen among the Itzas of Lake Peten,
about 1690.[64-1]

These books consisted of one long sheet of a kind of paper made by
macerating and beating together the leaves of the maguey, and afterwards
sizing the surface with a durable white varnish. The sheet was folded
like a screen, forming pages about 9 × 5 inches. Both sides were covered
with figures and characters painted in various brilliant colors. On the
outer pages boards were fastened, for protection, so that the completed
volume had the appearance of a bound book of large octavo size.

Instead of this paper, parchment was sometimes used. This was made from
deerskins, thoroughly cured and also smoked, so that they should be less
liable to the attacks of insects. A very durable substance was thus
obtained, which would resist most agents of destruction, even in a
tropical climate. Twenty-seven rolls of such parchment, covered with
hieroglyphics, were among the articles burned by Bishop Landa, at Mani,
in 1562, in a general destruction of everything which related to the
ancient life of the nation. He himself says that he burned all that he
could lay his hands upon, to the great distress of the natives.[65-1]

A very few escaped the destructive bigotry of the Spanish priests. So
far as known these are.--

1. The Codex Tro, or Troano, in Madrid, published by the French
government, in 1869.

2. What is believed to be the second part of the Codex Troano, now
(1882) in process of publication in Paris.

3. The Codex Peresianus, in the National Library, Paris, a very limited
edition of which has been issued.

4. The Dresden Codex, in Kingsborough's Mexico, and photographed in
colors, to the number of 50 copies, in 1880, which is believed to
contain fragments of two different manuscripts.

To these are, perhaps, to be added one other in Europe and two in
Mexico, which are in private hands, and are alleged to be of the same
character.

All the above are distinctly in characters which were peculiar to the
Mayas, and which are clearly variants of those found on the sculptured
beams and slabs of Uxmal, Chichen Itza, Palenque and Copan.

It is possible that many other manuscripts may be discovered in time,
for Landa tells us that it was the custom to bury with the priests the
books which they had written. As their tombs were at times of solid
stones, firmly cemented together, and well calculated to resist the
moisture and other elements of destruction for centuries, it is nowise
unlikely that explorations in Yucatan will bring to light some of these
hidden documents.

The contents of these books, so far as we can judge from the hints in
the early writers, related chiefly to the ritual and calendar, to their
history or Katuns, to astrological predictions and divinations, to their
mythology, and to their system of healing disease.


§ 9. _Modern Maya Manuscripts._

As I have said, the Mayas were naturally a literary people. Had they
been offered the slightest chance for the cultivation of their
intellects they would have become a nation of readers and writers.
Striking testimony to this effect is offered by Doctor Don Augustin de
Echano, Prebend of the Cathedral Church of Merida, about the middle of
the last century. He observes that twelve years of experience among the
Indians had taught him that they were very desirous of knowledge, and
that as soon as they learned to read, they eagerly perused everything
they could lay their hands on; and as they had nothing in their tongue
but some old writings that treated of sorceries and quackeries, the
worthy Prebend thought it an excellent idea that they should be
supplied, in place of these, with some ---- _sermons_![67-1] But what
else could be expected of a body of men who crushed out with equal
bigotry every spark of mental independence in their own country?

The "old writings" to which the Prebend alludes were composed by natives
who had learned to write the Maya in the alphabet adopted by the early
missionaries and conquerors. An official document in Maya, still extant,
dates from 1542, and from that time on there were natives who wrote
their tongue with fluency. But their favorite compositions were works
similar to those to which their forefathers had been partial,
prophecies, chronicles and medical treatises.

Relying on their memories, and no doubt aided by some of the ancient
hieroglyphical manuscripts, carefully secreted from the vandalism of the
monks, they wrote out what they could recollect of their national
literature.

There were at one time a large number of these records. They are
referred to by Cogolludo, Sanchez Aguilar and other early historians.
Probably nearly every village had one, which in time became to be
regarded with superstitious veneration.

Wherever written, each of these books bore the same name; it was always
referred to as "The Book of Chilan Balam." To distinguish them apart,
the name of the village where one was composed was added. Thus we have
still preserved to us, in whole or in fragments, the Book of Chilan
Balam of Chumayel, of Kaua, of Nabula, etc., in all, it is said, about
sixteen.

"Chilan Balam" was the designation of a class of priests. "Chilan," says
Bishop Landa, "was the name of their priests, whose duty it was to teach
the sciences, to appoint holy days, to treat the sick, to offer
sacrifices, and especially to utter the oracles of the gods. They were
so highly honored by the people that usually they were carried on
litters on the shoulders of the devotees."[69-1] Strictly speaking, in
Maya, _chilan_ means "interpreter," "mouth-piece," from "_chij_," "the
mouth," and in this ordinary sense frequently occurs in other writings.
The word _balam_--literally, "tiger,"--was also applied to a class of
priests, and is still in use among the natives of Yucatan as the
designation of the protective spirits of fields and towns, as I have
shown at length in a study of the word as it occurs in the native myths
of Guatemala.[70-1] "_Chilan Balam_," therefore, is not a proper name,
but a title, and in ancient times designated the priest who announced
the will of the gods and explained the sacred oracles. This accounts for
the universality of the name and the sacredness of its associations.

The dates of the books which have come down to us are various. One of
them, "The Book of Chilan Balam of Mani," was undoubtedly composed not
later than 1595, as is proved by internal evidence. Various passages in
the works of Landa, Lizana, Sanchez Aguilar and Cogolludo--all early
historians of Yucatan--prove that many of these native manuscripts
existed in the sixteenth century. Several rescripts date from the
seventeenth century--most from the latter half of the eighteenth.

The names of the writers are generally not given, probably because the
books, as we have them, are all copies of older manuscripts, with merely
the occasional addition of current items of note by the copyist; as, for
instance, a malignant epidemic which prevailed in the peninsula in 1673
is mentioned as a present occurrence by the copyist of "The Book of
Chilan Balam of Nabula."

These "Books of Chilan Balam" are the principal sources from which Señor
Pio Perez derived his knowledge of the ancient Maya system of computing
time, and also drew what he published concerning the history of the
Mayas before the Conquest, and from them also are taken the various
chronicles which I present in the present volume.

That I am enabled to do so is due to the untiring researches of Dr. Carl
Hermann Berendt, who visited Yucatan four times, in order to study the
native language, to examine the antiquities of the peninsula, and to
take accurate copies, often in fac-simile, of as many ancient
manuscripts as he could discover. After his death, his collection came
into my hands.

The task of deciphering these manuscripts is by no means a light one,
and I must ask in advance for considerable indulgence for my attempt.
Words and phrases are used which are not explained in the dictionaries,
or, if explained, are used in a different sense from that now current.
The orthography is far from uniform, each syllable is often written
separately, and as the punctuation is wholly fanciful or entirely
absent, the separation of words, sentences and paragraphs is often
uncertain and the meaning obscure.

Another class of documents are the titles to the municipal lands, the
records of surveys, etc. I have copies of several of these, and among
them was found the history of the Conquest, by Nakuk Pech, which I
publish. It was added to the survey of his town, as a general statement
of his rights and defence of the standing of his family.

My translations are not in flowing and elegant language. Had they been
so, they would not have represented the originals. For the sake of
accuracy I have not hesitated to sacrifice the requirements of English
composition.


§ 10. _Grammars and Dictionaries of the Language._

The learned Yucatecan, Canon Crescencio Carillo y Ancona, states in his
last work that there have been written thirteen grammars and seventeen
dictionaries of the Maya.[72-1]

The first grammar printed was that of Father Luis de Villalpando. This
early missionary died in 1551 or 1552, and his work was not issued until
some years later. Father Juan Coronel also gave a short Maya grammar to
the press, together with a _Doctrina_. It is believed that copies of
both of these are preserved. Beltran, however, acknowledges that in
preparing his own grammar he has never seen either of these earlier
works.[73-1]

In 1684, the _Arte de la Lengua Maya_, composed by Father Gabriel de San
Buenaventura, a French Franciscan stationed in Yucatan, was printed in
Mexico.[73-2] Only a few copies of this work are known. It has, however,
been reprinted, though not with a desirable fidelity, by the Abbe
Brasseur (de Bourbourg), in the second volume of the reports of the
_Mission Scientifique au Mexique et à l'Amerique Centrale_, Paris, 1870.

The leading authority on Maya grammar is Father Pedro Beltran, who was a
native of Yucatan, and instructor in the Maya language in the convent of
Merida about 1740. He was thoroughly conversant with the native tongue,
and his _Arte_ was reprinted in Merida, in 1859, as the best work of the
kind which had been produced.[74-1]

The eminent antiquary, Don Juan Pio Perez contemplated writing a Maya
grammar, and collected a number of notes for that purpose,[74-2] as did
also the late Dr. Berendt, but neither brought his work to any degree of
completeness. I have copies of the notes left by both these diligent
students, as also both editions of Beltran, and an accurate MS. copy of
Buenaventura, from all of which I have derived assistance in completing
the present study.

The first Maya dictionary printed was issued in the City of Mexico in
1571. It was published as that of Father Luis de Villalpando, but as he
had then been dead nearly twenty years, it was probably merely based
upon his vocabulary. It was in large 4to, of the same size as the second
edition of Molina's _Vocabulario de la Lengua Mexicana_. At least one
copy of it is known to be in existence.

For more than three centuries no other dictionary was put to press,
although for some unexplained reason that of Villalpando was unknown in
Yucatan. At length, in 1877, the publication was completed at Mérida, of
the _Diccionario de la Lengua Maya_, by Don Juan Pio Perez.[75-1] It
contains about 20,000 words, and is Maya-Spanish only. It is the result
of a conscientious and lifelong study of the language, and a work of
great merit. The deficiencies it presents are, that it does not give the
principal parts of the verbs, that it omits or does not explain
correctly many old terms in the language, and that it gives very few
examples of idioms or phrases showing the uses of words and the
construction of sentences.

I can say little in praise of the _Vocabulaire Maya-Francais-Espagnole_,
compiled by the Abbé Brasseur (de Bourbourg), and printed in the second
volume of the Report of the _Mission Scientifique au Mexique et à
l'Amerique Centrale_. It contains about ten thousand words, but many of
these are drawn from doubtful sources, and are incorrectly given; while
the derivations and analogies proposed are of a character unknown to the
science of language.

Besides the above and various vocabularies of minor interest, I have
made use of three manuscript dictionaries of the first importance, which
were obtained by the late Dr. Berendt. They belonged to three Franciscan
convents which formerly existed in Yucatan, and as they are all
anonymous, I shall follow Dr. Berendt's example, and refer to them by
the names of the convents to which they belonged. These were the convent
of San Francisco in Merida, that at the town of Ticul and that at Motul.

The most recent of these is that of the convent of Ticul. It bears the
date 1690, and is in two parts, Spanish-Maya and Maya-Spanish.

The _Diccionario del Convento de San Francisco de Merida_ bears no date,
but in the opinion of the most competent scholars who have examined it,
among them Señor Pio Perez, it is older than that of Ticul, probably by
half a century. It is also in two parts, which have evidently been
prepared, by different hands.

_The Diccionario del Convento de Motul_ is by far the most valuable of
the three, and has not been known to Yucatecan scholars. A copy of it
was picked up on a book stall in the City of Mexico by the Abbé
Brasseur, and sold by him to Mr. John Carter Brown, of Providence, R. I.
In 1864 this was very carefully copied by Dr. Berendt, who also made
extensive additions to it from other sources, indicating such by the use
of inks of different colors. This copy, in three large quarto volumes,
in all counting over 2500 pages, is that which I now have, and have
found of indispensable assistance in solving some of the puzzles
presented by the ancient texts in the present volume.

The particular value of the _Diccionario de Motul_ is not merely the
richness of its vocabulary and its numerous examples of construction,
but that it presents the language as it was when the Spaniards first
arrived. The precise date of its compilation is indeed not given, but
the author speaks of a comet which he saw in 1577, and gives other
evidence that he was writing in the first generation after the Conquest.


FOOTNOTES:

[9-1] "Tambien diz [el Almirante] que supó que ... aquella isla Española
ó la otra isla Jamaye estaba cerca de tierra firme, diez jornadas de
Canoa que podia ser sesenta á setenta leguas, y que era la gente vestida
alli." Navarrete, _Viages_, Tom. I, pag. 127.

[10-1] "In questo loco pigliorono una Nave loro carica di mercantia et
merce la quale dicevono veniva da una cierta provintia chiamata MAIAM
vel Iuncatam con molte veste di bambasio de le quale ne erono il forcio
di sede di diversi colori." _Informatione di Bartolomeo Colombo._ It is
thus printed in Harisse, _Bibliotheca Americana Vetustissima_, p. 473;
but in the original MS. in the Magliabechian library the words "vel
Iuncatam" are superscribed over the word "MAIAM," and do not belong to
the text. (Note of Dr. C. H. Berendt.) They are, doubtless, a later
gloss, as the name "Yucatan" cannot be traced to any such early date.
The mention of _silk_ is, of course, a mistake. Peter Martyr also
mentions the name in his account of the fourth voyage: "Ex Guaassa
insula et Taia Maiaque et cerabazano, regionibus Veraguæ occidentalibus
scriptum reliquit Colonus, hujus inventi princeps," etc. _Decad._ III,
Lib. IV.

[10-2] I have collected this evidence, drawing largely from the
manuscript works on the Arawack language left by the Moravian
missionary, the Rev. Theodore Schultz, and published it in a monograph,
entitled: _The Arawack Language of Guiana in its Linguistic and
Ethnological Relations_. (_Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society_, 1871.) There was a province in Cuba named _Maiye_; see Nicolas
Fort y Roldan, _Cuba Indígena_, pp. 112, 167 (Madrid, 1881). According
to Fort, this meant "origin and beginning," in the ancient language of
Cuba; but there is little doubt but that it presents the Arawack
negative prefix _ma_ (which happens to be the same in the Maya) and may
be a form of _majùjun_, not wet, dry.

[12-1] Eligio Ancona, _Historia de Yucatan_, Tom. I, p. 31 (Merida,
1878).

[12-2] _Diccionario Maya-Español del Convento de Motul._ MS. _Sub voce,
ichech._ The manuscript dictionaries which I use will be described in
the last section of this Introduction. The example given is:--

"ICHECH; tu eres, en lengua de Campeche; _ichex_, vosotros seis; _in
en_, yo soy; _in on_, nosotros somos. De aqui sale en lengua de Maya,
_tech cech ichech e_, tu que eres por ahi quien quiera," etc.

[13-1] See Eligio Ancona, _Hist. de Yucatan_, Tom. I, p. 37.

[13-2] "MAYA (accento en la primera); nombre proprio de esta tierra de
Yucatan." _Diccionario de Motul_, MS. "Una provincia que llamavan de la
_Maya_, de la qual la lengua de Yucatan se llama _Mayathan_." Diego de
Landa, _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_, p. 14. "Esta tierra de
Yucatan, à quien los naturales llaman _Ma´ya_," Cogolludo, _Historia de
Yucatan_, Lib. IV, Cap. III. "El antiguo Reyno de Maya ò Mayapan que hoy
se llama Yucatan." Villagutierre, _Historia de el Itza y de el
Lacandon_, p. 25. The numerous MSS. of the Books of Chilan Balam are
also decisive on this point.

[14-1] _Nombres Geograficos en Lengua Maya_, folio, MS. in my
collection.

[15-1] Note to Landa, _Rel. de las Cosas de Yucatan_, p. 14.

[15-2] _Vocabulaire Maya-Francais-Espagnole_, _sub voce_, MAYA.

[15-3] _Hist. de Yucatan_, p. 37.

[19-1] A discussion of the items of the census of 1862 may be found in
the work of the Licentiate Apolinar Garcia y Garcia, _Historia de la
Guerra de Castas de Yucatan_, Tomo I, Prologo, pp. lxvii, et seq.
(Merida 1865.) The completion of this meritorious work was unfortunately
prevented by the war. The author was born near Chan Ɔenote, Yucatan,
in 1837, and was appointed _Juez de Letras_ at Izamal in 1864.

[20-1] See, for example, _El Toro de Sinkeuel, Leyenda Hipica_ (Merida,
1856), a political satire, said to be directed against General Ampudia,
by Manuel Garcia.

[20-2] D. G. Brinton, _The Myths of the New World; a Treatise on the
Symbolism and Mythology of the Red Race of America_, Chap. VI (2d Ed.
New York, 1876).

[23-1] _Maya-uel_ may be from _maya_ and _ohel_, to know either
intellectually or carnally; or the last syllable may be _uol_, will,
desire, mind. This inventive woman would thus have been named "the Maya
wit" (in the old meaning of the word).

[23-2] Sahagun, _Historia de la Nueva España_, Lib. X, Cap. XXIX, p. 12.

[24-1] Fray Diego Duran, _Historia de las Indias de Nueva España y Islas
de Tierra Firme_, Cap. XIX (Ed. Mexico, 1867).

[24-2] See _Lettre de Fray Nicolas de Witt_ (should be Witte), 1554, in
Ternaux Compans, _Recueil des Piéces[TN-2] sur le Mexique_, p. 254, 286;
also the report of the "Audiencia" held in Mexico in 1531, in Herrera,
_Historia de las Indias Occidentales_, Dec. IV, Lib. IX, Cap. V.

[27-1] I mention this particularly in order to correct a grave error in
Landa's _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_, p. 130. He says, "Suelen de
costumbre sembrar para cada casado con su muger medida de cccc piés que
llaman _hun-uinic_, medida con vara de XX pies, XX en ancho y XX en
largo." The agrarian measure _uinic_ or _hun uinic_ (one man) contained
20 _kaan_, each 24 yards (_varas_) square. One _kaan_ was estimated to
yield two loads of corn, and hence the calculation was forty loads of
the staff of life for each family. Landa's statement that a patch 20
feet square was assigned to a family is absurd on the face of it.

[28-1] "La lengua castellana es mas dificultosa que la Maya para la
gente adulta, que no la ha mamado con la leche, como lo ha enseñado la
experiencia en los estranjeros de distintas naciones, y en los negros
bozales que se han radicado en esta provincia, que mas facilmente han
aprendido la Maya que la castellana." Apolinar Garcia y Garcia,
_Historia de la Guerra de Castas en Yucatan_. Prologo, p. lxxv. (folio,
Merida, 1865).

[31-1] Friedrich Müller, _Grundriss der Sprachwissenschaft_, II Band, s.
309. (Wien, 1882).

[31-2] Lucien Adam, _Etudes sur six Langues Américaines_, p. 155.
(Paris, 1878).

[35-1] Gabriel de San Buenaventura, _Arte de la Lengua Maya_, fol. 28
(Mexico, 1684).

[40-1] _Mémoire sur la numération dans la langue et dans l'Ecriture
sacrée des anciens Mayas_, in the Compte-Rendu of the Congrès
International des Américanistes, Vol. II, p. 439 (Paris, 1875).

[41-1] _Leti u Ebanhelio Hezu Crizto hebix Huan_, London, 1869. This
translation was made by the Rev. A. Henderson and the Rev. Richard
Fletcher, missionaries to the British settlements at Belize.

[41-2] _Leti u Cilich Evangelio Jesu Christo hebix San Lucas._ Londres,
1865. The first draught of this translation, in the handwriting of
Father Ruz, with numerous corrections by himself, is in the library of
the Canon Crescencio Carrillo at Mérida. A copy of it was obtained by
the Rev. John Kingdon of Belize, and printed in London without any
acknowledgment of its origin. It does not appear to me to be accurate.
For instance, chap. X, v. 1, "The Lord appointed other seventy also,"
where the Maya has _xan lahcatu cankal_, "seventy-two;" and again chap.
XV, v. 4, the ninety-nine sheep are increased to _bolon lahu uaxackal_,
one hundred and fifty-nine!

[42-1] _Apuntes para una Gramatica Maya._ Por Don Juan Pio Perez, MSS.
pp. 126, 128.

[42-2] "Me parece que _tu_ es síncopa de _ti u_." (Note of Dr. Berendt.)
There is no doubt but that Dr. Berendt is correct.

[43-1] This is not correct. Beltran gives for 45, _hotu yoxkal_, which I
analyze, _ho ti u u ox kal_.

[44-1] _Apuntes del Diccionario de la Lengua Maya. Por un yucateco
aficionado à la lengua_, 4to, pp. 486, MSS.

[45-1] "CAL: hartar ô emborrachar la fruta." _Diccionario Maya-Español
del Convento de San Francisco_, Merida, MS. I have not found this word
in other dictionaries within my reach.

[46-1] _Calepino en Lengua Cakchiquel por Fray_ Francisco de
Varea,[TN-4] MS. s. v. _chuvi_. This MS. is in the Library of the
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia.

[46-2] F. Pantaleon de Guzman, _Compendio de Nombres en Lengua
Cakchiquel_, MS. This MS. is in my collection.

[48-1] _Codice Perez_, p. 92, MS. This is a series of extracts from
various ancient Maya manuscripts obtained by the late distinguished
Yucatecan antiquary, Don Juan Pio Perez, and named from him by Canon
Crescencio Carrillo and other linguists. A copy of it is in my
collection. It is in quarto, pp. 258.

[54-1] All the examples in the above paragraph are from the Appendix to
the _Diccionario Maya-Español del Convento de San Francisco, Merida_,
MS. It also gives its positive authority to the length of the katuns, as
follows: "Dicese que los Indios contaban los años à pares (_sic_), y
cuando llegaba uno a veinte años, entonces decian que tenian _hunpel
katun_, que son veinte años.'[TN-6] I think the words _à pares_, must be an
error for _à veintenas_; they may mean "in equal series."

[54-2] The _Diccionario de Motul_ MS. has the following lengthy
entries:--

"TZUC: copete ô coleta de cabellos; ô de crines de caballo, ô las barbas
que echa el maiz por arriba estando en la mazorca; y la cabeza que
tienen algunas hachas y martillos en contra del tajo, y la cabeza del
horcon, y las nubes levantadas en alto y que dan que denotan segun dice
tempestad de agua. Partes, enpartimieñtos. Cuenta para pueblos, para
partes, parrafos i articulos, diferencios y vocablos montones."

[55-1] _Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. IV, cap. V.

[56-1] M. Delaporte's calculations are mentioned by Leon de Rosny,
_Essai sur le Déchiffrement de l'Ecriture Hiératique de l'Amérique
Centrale_, p. 25 (Paris, 1876); Professor Thomas' will be found in the
_American Naturalist_, for 1881, and in his _Study of the Codex Troano_,
Washington, 1882.

[57-1] Pio Perez, _Cronologia Antigua de Yucatan_. § VIII.

[57-2] "_Katun_, para siempre." Beltran de Santa Rosa, _Arte del Idioma
Maya_, p. 177.

[58-1] The following extracts from two manuscripts in my hands will
throw further light on this derivation--

KATUN: espacio de veinte años; _hun katun_, 20 años; _ca katun_, 40
años, etc.

KATUN: batallon de gente, ordenada de guerra y ejercito asi, y soldados
cuando actualmente andan en la guerra.

KATUN (TAH, TÉ): guerrear, hacer guerra, ò dar guerra.

KATUNBEN: el que tiene tantas venteinas de años, segun el numeral que se
le junta, _hay katunben ech?_ cuantas venteinas de años tienes tu? _ca
katunben en_, tengo dos venteinas.

DICCIONARIO DE MOTUL, MS., 1590.

ÇAT (he): generalmente sig^a cortar algo con acha, cuchillo ô hiera;
detener algo que se huya, atajarlo, etc.

Varea, _Calepino en Lengva[TN-8] Cakchiquel_, MS., 1699.

[61-1] _Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society_, 1880.

[62-1] The example he gives is the word _le_, which he says "para
escrivirle con sus caracteres _habiendoles nosotros hecho entender_ que
son dos letras, lo escrivian ellos con tres," etc., thus plainly saying
that they did not analyze the word to its phonetic radicals in their
system. _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_, p. 318.

[62-2] Las Casas says, with great positiveness, that they found in
Yucatan "letreros de ciertos caracteres que en otra ninguna parte."
_Historia Apologetica_, cap. CXXIII. I also add an interesting
description of their books and letters, furnished by the companions of
Father Alonso Ponce, the Pope's Commissary-General, who traveled through
Yucatan in 1586, when many natives were still living who had been born
before the Conquest (1541). Father Ponce had traveled through Mexico,
and, of course, had learned about the Aztec picture-writing, which he
distinctly contrasts with the writing of the Mayas. Of the latter he
says: "Son alabados de tres cosas entre todos los demas de la Nueva
España, la una de que en su antiguedad tenian caracteres y letras, con
que escribian sus historias y las ceremonias y orden de los sacrificios
de sus idolos y su calendario, en libros hechos de corteza de cierto
arbol, los cuales eran unas tiras muy largas de quarta ó tercia en
ancho, que se doblaban y recogian, y venia á queder á manera de un libro
encuardenada en cuartilla, poco mas, ó menos. Estas letras y caracteres
no las entendian, sino los sacerdotes de los idolos, (que en aquella
lengua se llaman 'ahkines'), y algun indio principal. Despues las
entendieron y supieron léer algunos frailes nuestros y aun las
escribien." (_Relacion Breve y Verdadera de Algunas Cosas de las Muchas
que Sucedieron al Padre Fray Alonso Ponce, Comisario-General en las
Provincias de la Nueva España_, page 392). I know no other author who
makes the interesting statement that these characters were actually used
by missionaries to impart instruction to the natives.

[63-1] "_uooh_; caracter o letra. _uooh_ (tah, te) escribir. _uoohan_,
cosa que esta escrita." _Diccionario de Motul_, MS.

[64-1] His words are: "Y satisfaciendoles por la quenta señalada, que
ellos mismos tenian, de que vsavan, para ajustar sus antiguas Profezias,
y los Tiempos de su cumplimiento, que eran vnos Caracteres y Figuras
pintadas en vnas cortezas de Arboles, como de una quarta de largo cada
hoja, ò tabilla, y del gruesso como de vn real de à ocho, dobladas à vna
parte, y à otra, à manera de Viombo, que ellos llamavan Analtees," etc.,
_Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de el Itza_, Lib. VII. cap I
(Madrid, 1701). Pio Perez spells the word _anahté_, _Diccionario de la
Lengua Maya_, s. v. following a MS. of the last century, given in the
_Codice Perez_. The word _hunilté_, from _huunil_, the "determinative"
form of "_hun_," and _té_, a termination to nouns which specifies or
localizes them (e. g. _amay_, an angle, _amay té_, an angular figure,
etc)., would offer a plausible derivation for _analté_.

[65-1] "Se les quemamos todos lo qual à maravilla sentian y les dava
pena." _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_, p. 316.

[67-1] "La experiencia de manejar tan incessantemente à los Indios en
cerca de doce años que los servi, me enseñó, que el motivo de estar
todavia muchos tan pegados à sus antiguedades, era porque siendo los
naturales muy curiosòs, y aplicandose à saber leer: los que esto logran,
quanto papel tienen à mano, tanto leen: y no aviendo entre ella, mas
tratados en su idioma, que los que sus antepasados escribieron, cuya
materia es solo de sus hechicerias, encantos, y curaciones con muchos
abusos, y ensalmos; ya se ve que en estos bebian insensiblemente el
tosigo para vomitar despues su malicia en otros muchos." _Aprobacion del
Doctor D. Augustin de Echano_, etc., to Dr. Don Francisco Eugenio
Dominguez, _Platicas de los Principales Mysterios de Nvestra[TN-9] S^ta
Fee, hechas en el Idioma Yucateco_. Mexico, 1758. This extremely rare
work is highly prized for the purity and elegance of the Maya employed
by the author.

[69-1] _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_, page 160.

[70-1] _The Names of the Gods in the Kiche Myths of Central America.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society_, Vol. XIX, 1881. The
terminal letter in both these words--"_chilan_," "_balam_,"--may be
either "_n_" or "_m_," the change being one of dialect and local
pronunciation. I have followed the older authorities in writing "_Chilan
Balam_," the modern preferring "_Chilam Balam_."

[72-1] _Historia Antigua de Yucatan, p. 123_ (Merida, 1882).

[73-1] _Arte del Idioma Maya_, p. 242 (2d ed).

[73-2] _Arte de la Lengua Maya_, compuesto por el R. P. Fr. Gabriel de
San Buenaventura Predicador y difinidor habitual de la Provincia de San
Joseph de Yucathan del Orden de N. P. S. Francisco. Año de 1684. Con
licencia; En Mexico, por la Viuda de Bernardo Calderon, 4to. pag. 1-4,
leaves 5-41.

[74-1] _Arte del Idioma Maya reducido a succintas reglas, y semilexicon
Yucateco_ por el R. P. F. Pedro Beltran de Santa Rosa Maria. En Mexico
por la Viuda de D. Joseph Bernardo de Hogal. Año de 1746. 8vo, pp. 8,
1-188. Segunda edicion, Mérida de Yucatan, Imprenta de J. D. Espinosa.
Julio, 1859. 8vo, 9 leaves, pp. 242.

[74-2] _Apuntes para una Gramatica Maya._ Por Don Juan Pio Perez, pp.
45-136. _MSS._

[75-1] _Diccionario de la Lengua Maya_, por D. Juan Pio Perez. Merida de
Yucatan. Imprenta literaria, de Juan F. Molina Solis, 1866-1877. Large
8vo, two cols. pp. i-xx, 1-437.




THE CHRONICLES.

    I. THE SERIES OF THE KATUNS.
        _From the Book of Chilan Balam of Mani._

   II. THE SERIES OF THE KATUNS.
        _From the Book of Chilan Balam of Tizimin._

  III. THE RECORD OF THE COUNT OF THE KATUNS.
        _From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel._

   IV. THE MAYA KATUNS.
        _From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel._

    V. THE CHIEF KATUNS.
        _From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel._




THE CHRONICLES.


The chronicles and fragments of chronicles which I have collected here
are all taken from the various "Books of Chilan Balam." They constitute
about all that remains to us, so far as I know, of the ancient history
of the peninsula. There are, indeed, in other portions of these "Books"
references to historical events before the Conquest, but no other
consecutive narrations of them.

Except the one given first, none of these has ever been printed, nor
even translated from the Maya into any European language. Whether they
corroborate or contradict one another, it is equally important for
American archæology to have them preserved and presented in their
original form.

It does not come within my present purpose to try to reconcile the
discrepancies between them. I am furnishing materials for history, not
writing it, and my chief duty is to observe accuracy, even at the risk
of depreciating the value of the documents I offer.

I have, therefore, followed strictly the manuscripts which I possess in
fac-similes of the originals, and when I believe the text is corrupt or
in error, I have suggested apart from the text what I suppose to be the
needed correction to the passage.

In the notes I have also discussed such grammatical or historical
questions as have occurred to me as of use in elucidating the text.

There will be found considerable repetition in these different versions,
as must necessarily be from their character, if they have a claim to be
authentic records; but it is also fair to add that details will be found
in each which are omitted in the others, and hence, that all are
valuable.

This similarity may be explained by two suppositions; either they are
copies from a common original, or they present the facts they narrate in
general formulæ which had been widely adopted by the priests for
committing to memory their ancient history. The differences which we
find in them preclude the former hypothesis except as it may apply to
the first two. The similarities in the others I believe are no more than
would occur in relating the same incidents which had been learned
through fixed forms of narration.

The division into sections I have made for convenience of reference. The
variants I have given at the bottom of the page are readings which I
think are preferable to those in the text, or corrections of manifest
errors; but I have endeavored to give the text, just as it is in the
best MSS. I have, errors and all.

It is not my purpose to enter into a critical historical analysis of
these chronicles. But a few remarks may be made to facilitate their
examination.

Making the necessary omissions in No. II, which I point out in the
prefatory note to it, it will be found that all five agree tolerably
well in the length of time they embrace. Nos. III and IV begin at a
later date than the others, but coincide as far as they go.

The total period of time, from the earliest date given, to the
settlement of the country by the Spaniards, is 71 katuns. If the katun
is estimated at twenty years, this equals 1420 years; if at twenty-four
years, then we have 1704 years.

All the native writers agree, and I think, in spite of the contrary
statement of Bishop Landa, that we may look upon it as beyond doubt,
that the last day of the 11th katun was July 15th, 1541. Therefore the
one of the above calculations would carry us back to A. D. 121, the
other to B. C. 173.

The chief possibility of error in the reckoning would be from confusing
the great cycles of 260 (or 312) years, one with another, and assigning
events to different cycles which really happened in the same. This would
increase the number of the cycles, and thus extend the period of time
they appear to cover. This has undoubtedly been done in No. II.

According to the reckoning as it now stands, six complete great cycles
were counted, and parts of two others, so that the native at the time of
the Conquest would have had eight great cycles to distinguish apart.

I have not found any clear explanation how this was accomplished. We do
not even know what name was given to this great cycle, nor whether the
calendar was sufficiently perfected to prevent confusion in dates in the
remote past.

I find, however, two passages in the collection of ancient manuscripts,
which I have before referred to as the _Codice Perez_, which seem to
have a bearing on this point; but as the text is somewhat corrupt and
several of the expressions archaic, I am not certain that I catch the
right meaning. These passages are as follows:--

    U hiɔil lahun ahau u ɔocol hun uuɔ katun, u zut tucaten oxlahunpiz
    katun ɔiban tu uichob tu pet katun; la hun uuɔ katun u kaba ca bin
    ɔococ u than lae, u hoppol tucaten; bay hoppci ca ɔib lae ca tun
    culac u yanal katun lae. Cabin ɔococ uaxac ahau lae u hoppol tucaten
    lae. (Page 90.)

    U hiɔil Lahun Ahau u ɔocol u nuppul oxlahunpez katun ɔiban u uichob
    tu pet tzaton lo hun (_sic_) uuɔ katun u kaba ca bin ɔococ u than
    lae, ca tun culac u yanal katun ca bin ɔococ uaxac Ahau lae; hu
    hoppol tucaten bay hoppci ca ɔib. (Page 168.)


_Translation._

     At the last of the tenth ahau katun is ended one doubling of the
     katun, and the return a second time of thirteen katuns is written
     on the face of the katun circle; one doubling of the katuns, as it
     is called, will then finish its course, to begin again; and when it
     begins, it is written that another katun commences: when the eighth
     katun ends it begins again (_i. e._, to count with this eighth as
     the first of the next "doubling").

     At the last of the tenth Ahau Katun is ended the joining together
     of thirteen katuns (which is) written on the face of the katun
     circle; one doubling of the katuns, as it is called, will then
     finish its course, and another katun will begin and will end as the
     eighth katun; this begins a second time, as it began (at first) and
     was then written.

In other words, if I do not miss the writer's meaning, the repetitions
of the great cycle of thirteen katuns were not counted from either of
its terminals, to wit, the thirteenth or the second katun, but from the
tenth katun. These repetitions were called _uuɔ katun_, the doubling
or foldings over of the katuns, and they were inscribed on the circle or
wheel of the katuns at that part of it where the tenth katun was
entered. These wheels were called _u pet katun_, the circle of the
katuns, or _u met katun_, the wheel of the katuns, or _u uazaklom
katun_, the return of the katuns. I have several copies of them, and one
is given in Landa's work, but I know of none which is a genuine
original, and, therefore, it is not surprising that I do not find on any
of them the signs referred to adjacent to the tenth katun.

For the convenience of the reader I have drawn up the following
chronological table of the events referred to in the Chronicles,
arranging them under the Great Cycles and Katuns to which they would
belong were the former numbered according to the regular sequence given
on page 59. I have also inserted the katuns which were omitted by the
native chroniclers, but which, according to that sequence, are necessary
in order to complete their records in accordance with the theory of the
Maya calendar. The references in Roman numerals are to the different
chronicles.


SYNOPSIS OF MAYA CHRONOLOGY.

  _Great
  Cycle._ _Katun._

     I.      8  They leave Nonoual (I.)
             6
             4
             2
    II.     13  They arrive at Chacnouitan (I.)
            11
             9
             7
             5
             3
             1
            12
            10
             8  Chichen Itza heard of (II.)
             6  Bacalar and Chichen Itza discovered (I, II, III.)
             4  Ahmekat Tutulxiu arrives (I?, II.)
             2
   III.     13  _Pop_ first counted (_i. e._ calendar arranged) (II, III.)
            11  Remove to Chichen Itza (I.)
             9
             7
             5
             3
             1  Abandon Chichen Itza; remove to Champoton (I, II.)
            12
            10  Abandon Chichen Itza; remove to Champoton (III.)
             8
             6  Champoton taken (I, II.)
             4  Champoton taken (III.)
             2
    IV.     13
            11
             9
             7
             5
             3
             1
            12
            10
             8  Champoton abandoned (I, II, III.)
             6  The Itzas houseless (I.[TN-10] II, III.) The [TN-11]well
                dressed" driven out (IV.)
             4  Return to Chichen Itza (I, II.)
             2  Uxmal founded (I.) The League in Mayapan begins (I.)
     V.     13  Mayapan founded (V.)
            11
             9
             7
             5  Chichen Itza destroyed by Kinich Kakmo
   (IV.)
             3
             1  The last of the Itzas leave Chichen Itza (IV.)
            12
            10  Uxmal founded (II.)
             8  Plot of or against Hunac Ceel (I, II, III.)
                Zaclactun Mayapan founded (IV.)
                Chakanputun burned (IV.)
             6  War with Ulmil (I.)
             4  The land of Mayapan seized (II, III.)
             2
    VI.     13
            11  Mayapan attacked by Itzas under Ulmil and depopulated by
                foreigners (I.)
             9
             7
             5  Naked cannibals came (IV.)
             3
             1  Tancah Mayapan destroyed (IV.)
            12
            10
             8  Mayapan finally destroyed (I, II, III, V.)
             6  The Maya league ended (V.)
             4  The pestilence (II, III, IV.)
             2  Spaniards first seen (I, II.) Smallpox (III.)
   VII.     13  Ahpula died (I, II, III.) The pestilence (I.)
            11  Spaniards arrive (I, II, III, IV, V.) Ahpula died (IV.)




I. THE SERIES OF THE KATUNS.

_From the Book of Chilan Balam of Mani._


The first chronicle which I present is the only one which has been
heretofore published. On account of its comparative fullness it deserves
especial attention. It is taken from the Book of Chilan Balam of the
town of Mani.

This town, according to a tradition preserved by Herrera, was founded
after the destruction of Mayapan, and, therefore, not more than seventy
years before the arrival of the Spaniards. Mayapan was destroyed in
consequence of a violent feud between the two powerful families who
jointly ruled there, the Cocoms and the Xius or Tutul Xius. The latter,
having slain all members of the Cocom family to be found in the city,
deserted its site and removed south about fifteen miles, and there
established as their capital a city to which they gave the name Mani,
"which means 'it is past,' as if to say 'let us start anew.'"[89-1]

At the time of the Conquest the reigning chief of the Tutulxius was
friendly to the Spaniards, and voluntarily submitted to their rule, as
we are informed with much minuteness of detail by the historian
Cogolludo.[90-1] We may reasonably suppose, therefore, that this
chronicle was brought from Mayapan in the "Books of Science," which
Herrera refers to as esteemed their greatest treasure by the chiefs who
broke up their ancient confederation when Mayapan was deserted. Hence
the records ran a better chance of being preserved in this province than
in those which were desolated by war. As I have already said (page 65) a
large number were destroyed precisely at Mani by Bishop Landa, in 1562.

I find among the memoranda of Dr. Berendt reference to four "Books of
Chilan Balam," of Mani. These dated from 1689, 1697, 1755 and 1761,
respectively, but I have not learned from which of these Pio Perez
extracted the chronicles he gave Mr. John L. Stephens. Dr. Berendt adds
that it was from one which was in possession of a native schoolmaster of
Mani, who, having the surname Balam, claimed to be descended from the
original Chilan Balam![91-1]

The first publication of the document was in the Appendix to the second
volume of Mr. Stephens' _Incidents of Travel in Yucatan_ (New York,
1843). It included the original Maya text, with a not very accurate
translation into English of Pio Perez's rendering of the Maya. From Mr.
Stephen's volume, the document has been copied into various publications
in Mexico, Yucatan and Europe.

The other attempt at an independent translation was that of the Abbé
Brasseur (de Bourbourg), published at Paris in 1864, in the same volume
with Landa's _Relacion de las Cosas de Yucatan_. The text he took from
Stephens' book, errors and omissions included, and his translation is
entirely based on the English one, as he evidently did not have access
to the original Spanish of Pio Perez.

The most important recent study of the subject has been made by Dr.
Valentini, who published the notes of Pio Perez on his translation, and
gave a general re-examination of ancient Maya history, with a great deal
of sagacity and a large acquaintance with the related Spanish
literature.[92-1] He is, however, in error in stating that he was the
first to publish the notes of Perez, as they had previously been printed
in a work by Canon Carrillo.[92-2]

Much use of this chronicle has been made by the recent historians of
Yucatan, Don Eligio Ancona and the Canon Crescencio Carrillo y Ancona;
but I am surprised to find that they have depended entirely on the
previous labors of Pio Perez, Stephens and Brasseur, and have made no
attempt to verify or extend them.

Dr. Berendt, although earnestly devoted to collecting and copying these
records did not, as Dr. Valentini observes, ever attempt a translation
of any of them.

No hint is given as to the author of the document, nor do we know from
what sources he derived his information. It has been plausibly suggested
that it was an epitome of the history of their nations, which was
learned by heart and handed down from master to disciple, and which
served as a verbal key to the interpretation of the painted and
sculptured records, and to the "katun stones" which were erected at the
expiration of each cycle and inscribed with the principal events which
had transpired in it.

The Abbé Brasseur placed at the head of his edition of this chronicle
the title, in Maya:--

"LELO LAI U TZOLAN KATUNIL TI MAYAB,"

which he translates--

"SÉRIES DES EPOQUES DE L'HISTOIRE MAYA."

This is an invention of the learned antiquary. There is no such nor any
other title to the original. It is simply called in the first line _u
tzolan katun_, the arrangement or order of the katuns. The word _tzolan_
is a verbal noun, the past participle of the passive voice of _tzol_,
which means to put in order, to arrange, and is in the genitive of the
thing possessed, as indicated by the pronoun _u_. Literally, the phrase
reads, "their arrangement (the) katuns."


TEXT.

1. Lai u tzolan katun lukci ti cab ti yotoch Nonoual cante anilo
Tutulxiu ti chikin Zuiua u luumil u talelob Tulapan [95-1]chiconahthan.

2. Cante bin ti katun lic u ximbalob ca uliob uaye yetel Holon
Chantepeuh yetel u cuchulob. Ca hokiob ti petene uaxac ahau bin yan
cuchi uac ahau, can ahau, cabil ahau, cankal haab catac hunppel haab,
tumen hun piztun oxlahun ahau cuchie, ca uliob uay ti petene, cankal
haab catac hunppel haab, tu pakteil, yetel cu ximbalob lukci tu luumilob
ca talob uay ti petene Chacnouitan lae; u añoil lae 81 ---- ---- ---- 81.

3. Uaxac ahau, uac ahau; cabil ahau kuchci chacnouitan Ahmekat Tutulxiu;
hunppel haab minan ti hokal haab cuchi yanob chacnouitan lae; lai u
habil lae ---- ---- ---- 99 años.

4. Laitun uchci u chicpahal tzucubte Ziyan caan lae Bakhalal; can ahau,
cabil ahau, oxlahun ahau, oxkal haab cu tepalob Ziyan caan ca emob uay
lae; lai u habil cu tepalob Bakhalal [96-1]chuulte laitun chicpahci
Chicħen Itza lae ---- ---- 60 años.

5. Buluc ahau, bolon ahau, uuc ahau, ho ahau, ox ahau, hun ahau, uackal
haab, cu tepalob Chichen Itzaa, ca paxi Chicħen Itza, ca binob cahtal
Chanputun, ti yanhi u yotochob ah Itzaob kuyan uincob lae; lay u habil
lae ---- ---- 120.

6. Uac ahau chucuc u luumil Chanputun. Can ahau, cabil ahau, oxlahun
ahau, buluc ahau, bolon ahau, uuc ahau, ho ahau, ox ahau, hun ahau,
lahca ahau, lahun ahau, uaxac ahau paxci Chanputun; oxlahunkal haab cu
tepalob Chanputun tumenel Ytza uinicob ca talob u tzac le u yotochob tu
caten; laixtun u katunil binciob ah Itzaob yalan che, yalan [96-2]aban,
yalan ak ti numyaob lae; lai u habil cu [96-3]xinbal lae ---- ---- ----
260.

7. Uac ahau, can ahau, cakal haab, ca talob u heɔob yotoch tu caten ca
tu zatahob chakanputun; lay u habil lae ---- ---- ---- 40.

8. Lai u katunil cabil ahau u heɔcicab Ahcuitok Tutulxiu Uxmal; cabil
ahau, oxlahun ahau, buluc ahau, bolon ahau, uuc ahau, ho ahau, ox ahau,
hun ahau, lahca ahau, lahun ahau; lahun kal haab cu tepalob yetel u
halach uinicil chicħen Itza yetel Mayalpan; lai u habil lae ---- ----
200.

9. Lai u katunil buluc ahau bolon ahau uuc ahau, uaxac ahau, paxci u
halach uinicil Chicħen Itzaa tumenel u kebanthan Hunac eel; ca uch ti
Chacxibchac Chichen Itzaa tu kebanthan Hunac eel u halach uinicil
Mayalpan ich paae. Cankal haab catac lahunpiz haab, tu lahun tun, uaxac
ahau cuchie lai u habil paxci tumenel Ahzinteyut chan yetel Tzuntecum,
yetel Taxcal, yetel Pantemit, Xuchueuet yetel Ytzcuat, yetel Kakaltecat;
lai u kaba uiniclob lae uuctulob ah Mayelpanob lae ---- ---- ---- ----
90.

10. Laili u katunil uaxac ahau lai ca binob u paa ah Ulmil ahau tumenel
u uahal uahoob yetel ah Itzmal ulil ahau lae oxlahun uuɔ u katunilob
ca paxob tumen Hunac eel; tumenel u ɔabal u natob; uac ahau ca ɔoci
hunkal haab catac canlahun pizi; lai u habil cu [97-1]xinbal ---- 34.

11. Uac ahau, can ahau, cabil ahau, oxlahun ahau, buluc ahau chucuc u
luumil ich paa Mayapan, tumenel u pach tulum, tumenel multepal ich cah
Mayalpan, tumenel Ytza uinicob yetel Ulmil ahau lae, cankal haab catac
oxppel haab; yocol buluc ahau cuchi paxci Mayalpan tumenel ahuitzil
ɔul tan cah Mayapan ---- ---- 83.

12. Uaxac ahau lai paxci Mayapan; lay u katunil uac ahau, can ahau,
cabil ahau, lai haab, cu ximbal ca yax mani españoles u yax ulci caa
luumi Yucatan tzucubte lae oxkal haab paxac ichpaa cuchie ---- ---- ----
---- 60.

13. Oxlahun ahau, buluc ahau uchci mayacimil ich paa yetel nohkakil;
oxlahun ahau cimci Ahpula; uacppel haab u binel ma ɔococ u xocol
oxlahun ahau cuchie; ti yanil u xocol haab ti lakin cuchie, canil kan
cumlahi pop, tu holhun zip catac oxppeli, bolon imix u kinil lai cimci
Ahpula; laytun año cu ximbal cuchi lae ca oheltab lai u xoc _numeroil
anos_ lae 1536 años cuchie, oxkal haab paxac ichpa cuchi lae.

14. Laili ma ɔococ u xocol buluc ahau lae lai ulci _españoles_ kul
uincob ti lakin, u talob ca uliob uay tac luumil lae; bolon ahau hoppci
_cristianoil_; uchci caputzihil; laili ichil u katunil lae ulci yax
_obispo_ Toroba u kaba; heix año cu ximbal uchie 1544.

15. Yan cuchi uuc ahau cimci yax obispo de landa; ychil u katunil ho
ahau ca yan cahi padre manii lai año lae ---- ---- ---- 1550.

16. Lai año cu ximbal ca cahi padre yok haa 1552.

17. Lai año cu ximbal ca uli Oidor la ca paki Espital ---- ---- ----
---- 1559.

18. Lai año cu ximbal ca kuchi Doctor Quijada yax gob^or uaye ----
---- ---- 1560.

19. Lai año cu ximbal ca uchci cħuitab lae 1562.

20. Lai año cu ximbal ca uli Mariscal gob^or ca betab [99-1]thulub
---- ---- ---- 1563.

21. Lai año cu ximbal ca uchci nohkakil lae 1609.

22. Lai año cu ximbal ca hichiucal kaxob 1610.

23. Lai año cu ximbal ca ɔibtah cah tumenel Juez Diego Pareja 1611.


TRANSLATION.

1. This is the arrangement of the katuns since the departure was made
from the land, from the house Nonoual, where were the four Tutulxiu,
from Zuiva at the west; they came from the land Tulapan, having formed a
league.

2. Four katuns had passed in which they journeyed when they arrived here
with Holon Chantepeuh and his followers. When they set out for this
country it was the eighth ahau. The sixth ahau, the fourth ahau, the
second ahau (passed), four score years and one year, for it was the
first year of the thirteenth ahau when they arrived here in this
country; four score years and one year in all had passed since they
departed from the land and came here, to the province Chacnouitan. These
were years 81.

3. The eighth ahau, the sixth ahau; in the second ahau Ahmekat Tutulxiu
arrived at Chacnouitan; they were in Chacnouitan five score years
lacking one year; these were years 99.

4. Then took place the discovery of the province Ziyan caan or Bakhalal;
the fourth ahau, the second ahau, the thirteenth ahau, three score years
they ruled Ziyan caan when they descended here: in these years that they
ruled Bakhalal it occurred then that Chichen Itza was discovered. 60
years.

5. The eleventh ahau, the ninth ahau, the seventh ahau, the fifth ahau,
the third ahau, the first ahau, six score years, they ruled at Chichen
Itza; then they abandoned Chichen Itza and went to live at Chanputun;
there those of Itza, holy men, had their houses; these were years 120.

6. In the sixth ahau the land of Chanputun was seized. The fourth ahau,
the second ahau, the thirteenth ahau, the eleventh ahau, the ninth ahau,
the seventh ahau, the fifth ahau, the third ahau, the first ahau, the
twelfth ahau, the tenth ahau; the eighth ahau Chanputun was abandoned;
thirteen score years Chanputun was ruled by the Itza men when they came
in search of their houses a second time; in this katun those of Itza
were under the trees, under the boughs, under the branches, to their
sorrow; the years that passed were 260.

7. The sixth ahau, the fourth ahau, two score years, (had passed) when
they came and established their houses a second time, and they lost
Chakanputun; these were years 40.

8. In the katun the second ahau Ahcuitok Tutulxiu founded (the city of)
Uxmal; the second ahau, the thirteenth ahau, the eleventh ahau, the
ninth ahau, the seventh ahau, the fifth ahau, the third ahau, the first
ahau, the twelfth ahau, the tenth ahau; ten score years they ruled with
the governor of Chichen Ytza and Mayapan; these were years 200.

9. Then were the katuns eleventh ahau, ninth ahau, sixth ahau; in the
eighth ahau the governor of Chichen Itza was driven out on account of
his plotting against Hunac Eel; and this happened to Chac Xib Chac of
Chichen Itza on account of his plotting against Hunac Eel the governor
of Mayapan, the fortress. Four score years and ten years, and it was the
tenth year of the eighth ahau that it was depopulated by Ah Zinteyut
Chan, with Tzuntecum, and Taxcal, and Pantemit, Xuchueuet and Ytzcuat
and Kakaltecat: these were the names of the seven men of Mayapan 90.

10. In this eighth ahau they went to the fortress of the ruler of Ulmil
on account of his banquet to Ulil ruler of Itzmal; they were thirteen
divisions of warriors when they were dispersed by Hunac Eel, in order
that they might know what was to be given; in the sixth ahau it ended,
one score years and fourteen; the years that passed were 34.

11. The sixth ahau, the fourth ahau, the second ahau, the thirteenth
ahau, the eleventh ahau; then was invaded the land of the fortress of
Mayapan by the men of Itza and their ruler Ulmil on account of the
seizure of the castle by the joint government in the city of Mayapan;
four score years and three years; the eleventh ahau had entered when
Mayapan was depopulated by foreigners from the mountains in the midst of
the city of Mayapan 83.

12. In the eighth ahau Mayapan was depopulated; then were the sixth
ahau, the fourth ahau, the second ahau; during this year the Spaniards
first passed and first came to this land the province of Yucatan, sixty
years after the fortress was depopulated. ---- ---- ---- ---- 60.

13. The thirteenth ahau; the eleventh ahau took place the pestilence in
the fortresses and the smallpox; in the thirteenth ahau Ahpula died; for
six years the count of the thirteenth ahau will not be ended; the count
of the year was toward the East, the month Pop began with (the day)
fourth Kan; the eighteenth day of the month Zip (that is), 9 Imix, was
the day on which Ahpula died; and that the count may be known in numbers
and years it was the year 1536, sixty years after the fortress was
destroyed.

14. The count of the eleventh ahau was not ended when the Spaniards,
mighty men, arrived from the east; they came, they arrived here in this
land; the ninth ahau Christianity began; baptism took place; also in
this katun came the first bishop Toroba by name; this was the year 1544.

15. In the seventh ahau died the first bishop de Landa; in the fifth
katun the Fathers first settled at Mani, in the year 1550.

16. As this year was passing the fathers settled upon the water ----
---- ---- 1552

17. As this year was passing the auditor came and the hospital was built
---- ---- 1559

18. As this year was passing the first governor Dr. Quijada, arrived
here ---- ---- 1560

19. As this year was passing the hanging took place ---- ---- ---- ----
1562

20. As this year was passing the Governor Marshall came and built the
reservoirs ---- 1563

21. As this year was passing the smallpox occurred ---- ---- ---- ----
1609

22. As this year was passing those of Tekax were hanged ---- ---- ----
1610

23. As this year was passing the towns were written down by Judge Diego
Pareja ---- 1611

NOTES.

1. The introductory paragraph is not less obscure in construction than
it is important in its historical statements, and I shall give it,
therefore, a particularly careful analysis.

I have already explained the term _u tzolan katun_; _lukci_ is the
aorist of _lukul_, which forms regularly _luki_, but the mutation to
_ci_ is used when the meaning _since_ or _after that_ is to be conveyed;
as Beltran says, "cuando el verbo trae estos romances, _despues que ò
desde que_, como este romance; despues que murio mi padre, estoy triste:
_cimci in yume, okomuol_" (_Arte del Idioma Maya_, p. 61). _cab_ means
country or place, in the sense of residence, whereas _luum_, used in the
same paragraph, is land or earth, in the general sense. The _Dicc. de
Motul_ says: "_cab_, pueblo ò region; _in cab_, mi pueblo, donde yo soy
natural." _yotoch_ is a compound of the possessive pronoun _u_, his or
their, and _otoch_, the word for house when it is indicated whose house
it is; otherwise _na_ is used; _otoch_ is probably allied to _och_ a
verbal root signifying to give food to, the house being looked upon as
specifically the place where meals are prepared.

The word _cante_ is translated by Perez and Brasseur as _four_, and
applied to the Tutulxiu, while the intervening word _anilo_ is not
translated by either: _cante_ is no doubt the numeral _four_ with the
numeral particle _te_ suffixed. But here a serious difficulty arises.
According to all the grammars and dictionaries the particle _te_ is
never used for counting persons, but only "years, months, days (periods
of time), leagues, cacao, eggs and gourds." Moreover, what is _anilo_?
We have, indeed, the form _tenilo_, I am that one, from the particle _i_
(Buenaventura, _Arte de la Lengua Maya_, fol. 27, verso); and we might
have _yanilo_, they are those. But this necessitates a change in the
text, and if that has to be done I should prefer to suppose that _anilo_
was a mistake of the copyist, and that we should read _katun_ or
_katunile_. This would reconcile the numeral particle and would do away
with the _four_ Tutulxius, of whom we hear nothing afterwards.

_chikin_, the West, literally, that which bites or eats the sun, from
_chi_, the mouth, and, as a verb, to bite. An eclipse is called in Maya
_chibal kin_, the sun bitten; _ti chikin_, toward the West.

_talelob_, plural form of _tal_ or _talel_, to come to, to go from.

_chiconahthan_ is not translated by either Pio Perez or Brasseur, nor in
that precise form has it any meaning. I take it, however, to be a faulty
orthography for _chichcunahthan_ which means to support that which
another says, hence, to agree with, to act in concert with; "_chichcunah
u thanil_, having renewed the agreement" (_Diccionario de Ticul_). It
refers to an agreement entered into by the different leaders who were
about to undertake the migration into unknown lands. Possibly, however,
this is not a Maya word, but another echo of Aztec legend.
_Chiconauhtlan_, "the place of the Nine," was a village and mountain
north of the lake of Tezcuco and close to the sacred spot Teotiuacan,
where, in Aztec myth, the gods assembled to create the sun and moon
(Sahagun, _Historia de Nueva España_, Lib VII, cap. II). _Tulapan
Chiconauhtlan_ would thus become a compound local name.

It will be seen from the above that the translation which I have given
of this paragraph does not satisfy me as certainly correct. I shall now
give the original with an interlinear translation, and also those of Pio
Perez and Brasseur, adding a free rendering which I am inclined to
prefer, although it modifies the text somewhat.


_Interlinear Translation._

  Lai           u       tzolan      katun            lukci
  This (is)   their     order     the katuns   since they departed

  ti     cab,       ti        yotoch       Nonoual     cante
  from the land    from    their house     Nonoual    the four

  anilo,          Tutulxiu     ti       chikin        Zuiua,
  those the (?)   Tutulxiu     to     the West (of)   Zuiua

  u        luumil      u    talelob      Tulapan      chiconah than.
  their  land (which) they  came (from)  was Tulapan  acting in concert.


_Translation of Pio Perez._

Esta es la serie de Katunes corridos desde que se quitaron de la tierra
y casa de Nonoual en que estaban los cuatro Tutulxiu al poniente de
Zuina; el pais de donde vinieron fué Tulapan.


_Translation of Brasseur._

C' est ici la série des epoques écoulées depuis que s' enfuirent les
quatre Tutul Xiu de la maison de Nonoual etant a l'ouest de Zuinà, et
vinrent de la terre de Tulapan.


_Free translation suggested._

This is the order of the Katuns since the four Katuns during which the
Tutulxiu left their home and country Nonoual to the west of Zuiua, and
went from the land and city of Tula, having agreed together to this
effect.

I have said nothing of the proper names in this paragraph. They are
remarkable for the fact that three out of the four are unquestionably
Nahuatl or Aztec, and hence they have given occasion for considerable
theorizing in favor of the "Toltec" origin of the Maya civilization, and
also of the Nahuatl descent of the princely family of the Tutulxiu.

Their name is the only one in the paragraph with a distinctively Maya
physiognomy. It is a compound of _xiu_, the generic term for herb or
plant, and _tutul_, a reduplicated form of _tul_, an abundance, an
excess, as in the verb _tutulancil_, to overflow, etc. (_Diccionario de
Ticul_, MS.). It would appear therefore to be a local name, and to
signify a place where there was an abundance of herbage. The surname is
Xiu only, and as such is still in use in Yucatan.

But it may also be claimed that even this is a Nahuatl name; for also in
that tongue _xiuitl_ means a plant, as well as a turquoise, a comet, a
year, and in composition a greenish or bluish color; while _tototl_ is a
bird or fowl. The Maya _xiu_ and the Nahuatl _xiuitl_ (in which _itl_ is
a termination lost in composition) are undoubtedly the same word. Which
nation borrowed it from the other? It is certainly a loan-word, for
these two languages have no common origin, while, as we might expect
from neighbors, each does have a number of loan-words from the other.

I answer that the Maya _xiu_ is unquestionably a loan from the Nahuatl,
and my reason for the opinion is that while in Maya the root _xiu_ is
sterile and has no relations to other words (unless perhaps to _xiitil_,
to open like a flower, to brood as a bird, to augment, to grow), in
Nahuatl it is a very fertile root, and nearly thirty compounds of it can
be found in the dictionaries (See Molina, _Vocabulario de la Lengua
Mexicana_, fol. 159, verso). But the composition of the name follows the
Maya and not the Nahuatl analogy.

That in either language the name Tutulxiu can be translated "Bird-tree"
(Vogelbaum), as is argued by Dr. Carl Schultz-Sellack (_Archiv für
Ethnologie_, Band XI, 1879), and on which translation he bases a long
argument, is very doubtful. It certainly could not in Maya; and in
Nahuatl, _tototl_ in composition would drop both its terminal
consonants.

The remaining names, Nonoual, Zuiua, Tula-pan, clearly indicate their
Nahuatl origin. Zuiua, which was erroneously printed in Pio Perez's
version as Zuina is Zuiva; Nonoual is Nonohual; Tulapan, literally "the
standard of Tula," refers to the famous city of the Toltecs, presided
over by Quetzalcoatl. All these names are borrowed directly from the
myth of this hero-god.

_Zuiven_ was the name of the uppermost heaven, the abode of the Creator
Hometeuctli, the father of Quetzalcoatl, and the place of his first
birth as a divinity. In later days, when the Quetzalcoatl myth had
extended to the Kiches and Cakchiquels, members of the Maya family in
Guatemala, "Tulan Zuiva" was identified with the Aztec Chicomoztoc, the
famous "Seven Caves," "Seven Ravines," or "Seven Cities," from which so
many tribes of Mexico, wholly diverse in language and lineage, claimed
that their ancestors emerged in some remote past (compare the _Codex
Vaticanus_, Lam. I; _Codex Zumarraga_, chap. I, with the _Popol Vuh_,
pp. 214, 227). To this spot the ancestors of the Guatemalan tribes were
reported to have gone to receive their gods; from it issued the Aztec
god Huitzilopochtli; in it still were supposed to dwell his mother and
other mighty divinities; and Quetzalcoatl was again the youngest born of
Iztac Mixcohuatl, the mighty lord of the Seven Caves (Motolinia,
_Historia de los Indios de Nueva España_ p[TN-12] 10, etc.).

_Tula_, properly _Tollan_, a syncopated form of _Tonatlan_, which means
"the place of the Sun," was a name applied to a number of towns in
Mexico, all named after that magnificent city inhabited by the Tolteca
("dwellers in the place of the Sun"), servants and messengers of the
Light-God their ruler, the benign, the virgin-born Quetzalcoatl. The
common tradition ran that it was destroyed by the wiles of Tezcatlipoca,
the brother, yet the eternal enemy, of Quetzalcoatl, and that at its
destruction the Toltecs disappeared, no one knew whither, while
Quetzalcoatl, after reigning a score of years in Cholula, journeyed far
eastward to the home of the Sun, where he enjoyed everlasting life.

_Nonohual_ also had a place in this myth. It was a mountain over against
Tulan. There it was that the eldest sister of Quetzalcoatl resided. When
he was made drunken by the insidious beverage handed him as a healing
draught by Tezcatlipoca, he sent for this sister, held to her lips the
intoxicating cup, and with her passed a night of debauch, the memory of
which filled him with such shame that nevermore dared he face his
subjects. Such is the story recited at length in the Aztec chronicle
called the _Codex Chimalpopoca_.

_Nonoalco_ was also the name of a small village near the city of Mexico
which still appears on the maps. Sahagun tells us that some extreme
eastern tribes in Mexico called themselves _Nonoalca_ (_Historia de la
Nueva España_, Lib. X, cap,[TN-13] XXIX, p[TN-14] 12); and the
licenciate Diego Garcia de Palacio mentions "quatro lugares de Indios
que llaman los Nunualcos" as dwelling, in his time (1576), in the
eastern part of the province of San Salvador, of Aztec descent, and who
had recently come there. (_Carta al Rey de España_, p. 60, New York,
1860). It should be mentioned in reference to these names and all others
of similar vocalization, that both in Maya and Nahuatl the Spanish
constantly confound the short ŏ and ŭ. As the Bachelor Don Antonio
Vasquez Gastelu observes: "usan de la _o_ algunos tan obscuramente, que
tira algo à la pronunciacion de la _u_ vocal" (_Arte de lengua
Mexicana_, fol. 1, verso, La Puebla de los Angeles, 1726).

Señor Alfredo Chavero, in his Appendix to Duran's _Historia de las
Indias de Nueva España_ (p. 45, Mexico, 1880), claims that _Nonoalca_
was the name given to the Maya-Kiche tribes, or rather adopted by them,
when, at an extremely remote epoch, they penetrated to the central table
land of Mexico. He thinks that subsequently they became united with the
Toltecs, and were dispersed with that people at the destruction of the
city of Tula. The grounds for this theory he claims to find in certain
unpublished manuscripts, which unfortunately he does not give in
extracts, but only in general statements. Like much that this writer
presents, these assertions lack support. All the names he quotes as of
Nonoalca, that is, Maya origin, are distinctly not of the latter tongue,
but are Nahuatl. And the introduction of the mystical city of Tula is of
itself enough to invest the story with the garb of unreality.

It is, in fact, nowhere in terrestrial geography that we need look for
the site of the Tula of Quetzalcoatl, nor at any time in human history
did the Tolteca ply their skillful hands, nor Tezcatlipoca spread his
snares to destroy them. All this is but a mythical conception of the
daily struggle of light and darkness, and those writers who seek in the
Toltecs the ancestors or instructors of any nation whatsoever, make the
once common error of mistaking myth for history, fancy for fact.
Therefore, any notion that Yucatan was civilized by the Toltecs after
their dispersion, or owes anything to them, as so many, and I might say
almost all recent writers have maintained, is to me an absurdity.

This reference to the Quetzalcoatl myth at the commencement of the Maya
chronicle needs not surprise us. We encounter it also in the Kiche
_Popol Vuh_ and the Cakchiquel _Memorial de Tecpan Atitlan_. These
members of the Maya family also grafted that myth upon their own
traditions. As history, it is valueless; but as indicative of a long and
early intercourse between the Maya and Nahuatl speaking tribes, it is of
great interest. As this question will also recur in reference to various
later passages in the Maya chronicles, I will discuss it here.

One of the earliest historians of Yucatan, the Doctor Don Pedro Sanchez
de Aguilar, states that six hundred years before the Spanish conquest
the Mayas were vassals of the Aztecs, and that they were taught or
forced by these to construct the extraordinary edifices in their
country, such as are found at Uxmal and Chichen Itza. His words are:
"Fueron tan politicos y justiciosos en Yucatan como los Mexicanos, cuyos
vasallos habian sido seis cientos años antes de la llegada de los
Españoles. De lo cual tan solamente hay tradicion y memoria entre ellos
por los famosos, grandes y espantosos edificios de cal y canto y
silleria y figuras y estatuas de piedra labrada que dejaron en Oxumual
[Uxmal] y en Chicheniza que hoy se veen y se pudieran habitar." _Informe
contra Idolum Cultores del Obispado de Yucatan_, fol. 87 (Madrid, 1639).

The vague tradition here referred to was made part of the testimony in a
lawsuit at Valladolid, Yucatan, in 1618. These old documents were
brought to light by the late eminent Yucatecan historian Doctor Justo
Sierra, and Dr. Berendt took a copy in manuscript of the most important
points. I think it worth while to insert and translate this testimony.


VILLA DE VALLADOLID--AÑO DE 1618.

"DOCUMENTO 1º. A la primera pregunta dijo este testigo que conoce al
dicho Don Juan Kahuil y à la dicha Doña Maria Quen su legitima muger y
que todos los contenidos en la pregunta, tuvo noticia muy larga de su
padre de este testigo, porque fue en su antiguedad _ahkin_, sacerdote
entre los naturales antiguos, antes que recibiesen agua de bautismo,
como los susodichos contenidos en la pregunta vinieron del reino de
Mexico y poblaron estas provincias, y que era gente bellicosa y valerosa
y Señores, y asi poblaron à Chichenica los unos, y otros se fueron hacia
el Sur que poblaron á Bacalar, y hacia el Norte que poblaron la costa;
porque eran tres ò cuatro Señores y uno que se llamo _Tumispolchicbul_
era deudo de Moctezuma, rey que fuè de los reinos de Mexico, y que
_Cuhuikakcamalcacalpuc_ era deudo muy cercano de dicho Don Juan Kahuil
por parte de sus padres, y que dicha _Ixnahaucupul_ hija de _Kukumcupul_
fue muger de su abuelo de dicho D. Juan Kahuil, todos los cuales fueron
los que vinieron de Mexico à poblar estas Provincias, gente principal y
Señores, pues poblaron y se señorearon de esta tierra, porque como dicho
tiene, le oyó decir al dicho su padre que eran tenidos, obedecidos y
respetados como à Señores de esta tierra, y de uno de ellos procede el
dicho D. Juan Kahuil, y de estos hay mucha noticia y dicho su padre le
dijo muchas veces, que habia constancia entre ellos de lo sucedido por
estos Señores.

"2º. A la segunda pregunta dice este testigo, que como dicho tiene, oyó
decir à su padre y otros Indios principales que los susodichos
contenidos en la primera pregunta vinieron de los reynos de Mejico à
poblar estàs provincias, los unos se quedaron en Chichinica que fueron
los que edificaron los edificios sontuosos que hay en el dicho asiento,
y otros se fueron à poblar à Bacalar, y otros fueron à poblar la costa
hacia el norte, y este que fué à poblar la costa, se llamaba _Cacalpuc_,
de donde procede el dicho D. Juan Kahuil, y estos que así se
repartieron, fueron à poblar las provincias susodichas, y las tuvieron
sugetas y en govierno, y que le cupo à un Cocom, el poblar en
Chichinica, y le obedecian todos por Señor, y los de la isla de cuzumel
le eran sugetos; y de alli (de Chicinica) se pasaron à la provincia de
Sotuta, donde estaban, cuando los conquistadores vinieron, y siempre
fueron tenidos, obedecidos y respetados como Señores.

"3º. A la primera pregunta dijò este testigo que conoce al dicho D. Juan
Kahuil, y à la dicha Da Maria Quen, su muger, y que de todos los
contenidos en la pregunta, tuvo muy larga noticia de ellos, porque D.
Juan Camal, cacique è gobernador que fuè del pueblo de Sisal, de los
primeros que lo gobernaron por comision e titulo que le diò el Oidor
Tomas Lopez, oiendo como era de los antiguos caciques del dicho pueblo
en estas provincias, lo trataba en conversacion à sus principales y este
testigo, que siempre estaba en su casa, y fué alguacil mayor ordinario
en ella, como los contenidos habian venido de Mejico à poblar esta
tierra de Yucatan, y que los unos poblaron à Chichinica y hicieron los
edificiós que estan en dicho asiento muy suntuosos, y que habiendo sido
los que vinieron de Mejico, cuatro deudos ò parientes con sus allegados
y gente que trajaron; el uno pobló como dicho tiene à Chichinica, y el
otro fué à poblar à Bacalar, y el otro hacia el Norte y pobló en la
costa, y el otro fué hacia Cozumel; è poblaron con gente, y fueron
Señores de estas provincias, y las gobernaron y señorearon muchos años;
y que oyó decir que uno de ellos llamado _Tanupolchicbul_ era pariente
de Moctezuma, rey de Mejico."


(_Translation._)

CORPORATION OF VALLADOLID--YEAR 1618.

"DOCUMENT NO. 1. To the first question the witness answered that he
knows the said Don Juan Kahuil and the said Dona Maria Quen his lawful
wife, and all those referred to in the question; that this witness had
full information from his father, who formerly was _ahkin_ or priest
among the natives, before they had received the water of baptism, how
the parties above mentioned in the question came from the kingdom of
Mexico, and established towns[116-1] in these provinces, and that they
were a warlike and valiant people and lords, and thus some of them
established themselves at Chichen Itza, and others went to the south and
established towns at Bacalar, and toward the north and established towns
on the coast; because they were three or four lords, and one, who was
named _Tumispolchicbul_, was a kinsman of Montezuma, king of the kingdom
of Mexico, and that _Cuhuikakcamalcacalpuc_ was a very near kinsman of
the said Don Juan Kahuil on his father's side, and that the said
_Ixnahaucupul_, daughter of _Kukumcupul_ was wife of the grandfather of
the said Don Juan Kahuil, all of whom were those who came from Mexico to
found towns in these provinces, prominent people and lords; then they
founded towns and ruled this land, because as he said, he heard his said
father say that they were regarded, obeyed and respected as lords of
this land, and that from one of them proceeded the said Don Juan Kahuil;
and of these there is abundant information, and his said father often
said to him that there was unanimity among them as to what took place by
these lords.

"2ND. To the second question this witness answered that as he has said,
he heard his father and other leading Indians say that the parties above
mentioned in the first question came from the Kingdom of Mexico to found
towns in these provinces; some remained in Chichen Itza, who were those
who built the sumptuous edifices which are in the said locality; others
went to found towns at Bacalar, and others to found towns on the coast
to the north; and he who went to found towns on the coast was named
Cacalpuc, from whom proceeds the said Don Juan Kahuil and those who thus
made division went to found towns in the above mentioned provinces, and
held them under subjection and government; and he chose a certain Cocom
to rule in Chichen Itza, and they all obeyed him as lord, and those of
the island of Cozumel were subject to him; and from there (from Chichen
Itza) they passed to the province of Zotuta, where they were when the
conquerors came, and they were always regarded, obeyed and respected as
lords.

"3RD. To the first question this witness answered that he knew all the
parties mentioned in the question and had abundant information about
them, because Don Juan Carnal who was chief and governor of Sisal, one
of the first who governed it by commission and brief given him by the
Auditor Tomas Lopez, being one of the ancient chiefs of the said town in
these provinces, spoke of the subject in conversation with his leading
men and with this witness, who was constantly in his house and was chief
clerk in ordinary in it, saying the parties mentioned had come from
Mexico to found towns in this land of Yucatan, and that some settled at
Chichen Itza, and erected the very stately edifices which are in the
said locality, and that those who came from Mexico were four kinsmen or
relatives with their friends and the people they brought with them; one
settled as heretofore said at Chichen Itza, one went to settle at
Bacalar, one went toward the north and settled on the coast, and the
other went toward Cozumel; and they founded towns with their people, and
were lords of these provinces, and governed them and ruled them many
years; and that he had heard it said that one of them named
_Tanupolchicbul_ was a kinsman of Moctezuma, King of Mexico."

This legend is also related, with some variation, by Herrera, and as I
shall have occasion more than once to refer to his account, I shall
translate it.

"At Chichen Itza, ten leagues from Itzamal, the ancients say there
reigned three lords, brothers, who came from the west, and gathered
together many people, and reigned some years in peace and justice; and
they constructed large and very beautiful edifices. It is said that they
lived unmarried and very chastely; and it is added that in time one of
them was missing, and that his absence worked such bad results that the
other two began to be unchaste and partial; and thus the people came to
hate them, and slew them, and scattered abroad, and deserted the
edifices, especially the most stately one, which is ten leagues from the
sea.

"Those who established themselves at Chichen Itza call themselves Itzas;
among these there is a tradition that there ruled a great lord called
Cuculcàn, and all agree that he came from the west; and the only
difference among them is as to whether he came before or after or with
the Itzas; but the name of the building at Chichen Itza, and what
happened after the death of the lords above mentioned, show that
Cuculcan ruled the country jointly with them. He was a man of good
disposition, was said not to have had either wife or children, and not
to have known woman; he was devoted to the interests of the people, and
for this reason was regarded as a god. In order to pacify the land he
agreed to found another city, where all business could be transacted. He
selected for this purpose a site eight leagues further inland from where
now stands the city of Merida, and fifteen leagues from the sea. There
they erected a circular wall of dry stone, about a half quarter of a
league in diameter, leaving in it only two gateways. They erected
temples, giving to the largest the name Cuculcàn, and also constructed
around the wall the houses of the lords among whom Cuculcàn had divided
the land, giving and assigning towns to each. To the city he gave the
name Mayapan, which means "the Standard of the Maya," as Maya is the
name of their language.

"By this means the country was quieted and they lived in peace for some
years under Cuculcan, who governed with justice, until, having arranged
for his departure, and recommending them to continue the wise rule he
had established, he left them and returned to Mexico by the same route
he had come, remaining in Champoton some time, where, in memory of his
journey, he erected a building in the sea, which remains to this
day."[120-1]

Bishop Landa and some other early writers also give versions of this
tradition, but do not add any facts to those in the above quotations.
Evidently it was a widespread legend of the origin of the great
buildings of Chichen Itza. Is it a tradition of fact or is it a myth?

I confess that to me it has a suspiciously mythical aspect. It is too
similar to what I may call the standard hero-myth of the American
Aborigines. Everywhere, both in North and South America, we find the
myth of the four brothers who divided the land between them, one of whom
is superior to the others and becomes the ruler and instructor of the
ancestors of the nation. He does not die, but disappears, or goes to
heaven, and is often expected to return. Just so in one of the Maya
myths, Cuculcan did not return to Mexico, but rose to heaven, whence
once every year he descended to his temple at Mayapan and received the
gifts which from far and wide pious pilgrims had brought to his shrine
(Landa, _Relacion_, p. 302). All these myths relate to the worship of
the four cardinal points and to the Light-God, as I have shown in a
previous work (_The Myths of the New World_, chap. III. New York, 1876).

The proper names in the legend have nothing of a Nahuatl appearance.
They are all pure Maya. The "kinsman of Moctezuma," the second reading
of whose name is the correct one, is given as _tan u pol chicbul_, "in
front of the head of the jay-bird," the _chicbul_ being what the
Spaniards call the _mingo rey_, which I believe is a jay (Beltran, _Arte
del Idioma Maya_, p. 229). The other long name is a compound of _Zuhuy
kak camal cacal puc_. The historian Cogolludo informs us that _Zuhuy
Kak_, literally "virgin fire," was the daughter of a king, afterwards
deified as goddess of female infants (_Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. IV,
cap. VIII). _Camal_ was and is a common patronymic in Yucatan;
_cacalpuc_ means "mountain land,"[121-1] and thus the whole name is
easily identified as Maya. Possibly the member of the family Camal who
bore the name was a priest of the goddess.

It will be noticed that neither the legend nor the legal testimony
speaks of these foreigners as of a different language or lineage, but
leaves us to infer the contrary. Had they been of Aztec race it would
certainly have been noticed, for the Mayas had frequent mercantile
relations with these powerful neighbors, they borrowed many words from
the Nahuatl tongue, and single chiefs in Yucatan formed alliances with
the Aztec rulers, and introduced Aztec warriors even into Mayapan, as is
shown by the Chronicles I publish in this work, and also by the fact
that a small colony of Aztecs, descendants of these mercenaries, was
living in the province of Canul, west of Merida, when the Spaniards
conquered the country (Landa, _Relacion_, p. 54). Therefore the Aztecs
were no strangers to the Mayas, and doubtless the learned members of the
priesthood and nobles in the fifteenth century were quite well aware of
the existence of the powerful empire of Anahuac.

But regarding the legend I have quoted as, in part at least, based on
actual history, we may accept the fact that there was an important
emigration from Mexico, and yet not one of either Aztecs or "Toltecs."
It must be remembered that the Huastecas, an important branch of the
Maya family, occupied from time immemorial the coast of the Mexican Gulf
north of Vera Cruz, and west to the mountains of Meztitlan, a province
inhabited by a Nahuatl speaking race, but not subject to the dynasty of
the Montezumas.

I have already referred briefly to their history, and it is possible
that after their serious reverses, about 1450, they sent migratory
bodies to their relatives in Yucatan. At any rate, there seems a
consensus of testimony that the general trend of migration of the Maya
race, was from north to south, and in Central America, from west to
east.

We have in this paragraph examples of the use of three of the "numeral
particles." _Cante bin ti katun_, literally, "it (_i. e._ time) went on
for four katuns," and a few lines later _hunpel haab_, one year,
_hunpiztun_, the first year.

The correct translation of _peten_ has been debated; it is from the root
_pet_, anything round, a circle, and usually means "island." By a later
use it signifies any locality with definite boundaries, hence a
province, or kingdom. The following is the entry in the _Diccionario de
Motul_:

"PETEN; isla, _item_ provincia, region, comarca--_uay tu petenil
Yucatan_, aqui en la provincia de Yucatan."

The name of the first leader, Holon Chan Tepeuh, does not recur in the
Annals. Its signification is: _holon_, a generic name for large bees and
flies; _chan_, sufficient, powerful, still in use in Yucatan as a
surname; _tepeuh_, ruler, from _tepeual_, to rule. This last word is
marked in the _Diccionario de Motul_ as a "vocablo antiquo." It is of
Aztec origin, as in the Nahuatl language _tepeuani_ means "conqueror."
The name we are considering should probably be rendered "Holon Chan, the
ruler." The province ruled by the Chan family at the time of the
conquest was on the eastern coast, south of that of the Cupuls.

The name _Chacnouitan_ is elsewhere, as we shall see, spelled
_Chacnovitan_ and _Chacnabiton_. I am inclined to believe the last
mentioned is nearest the correct form. By Pio Perez it was supposed to
be an ancient name of Yucatan, and he translates the phrase, _uay ti
petene Chacnouitan_, by "à esta isla de Chacnavitan (Yucatan)." Dr.
Valentini says: "the translation could as well stand for 'that distant
island,'" and that "Chacnouitan was neither the whole nor the northern
part of Yucatan, but a district situated in the southwest of the
peninsula," (_loc. cit._ p. 38).

With this I cannot agree, as the adverb _uay_ always refers to the place
(in no matter how wide an accepation) where the speaker is. Therefore I
translate it "here, (_i. e._ to this general country of Yucatan, and at
first) to the province Chacnouitan." The province referred to was, I
doubt not, somewhere around Lake Peten. The word _chac_ is often used in
local names in Yucatan, and usually means either "water" or "red," as it
is a homonym with several significations.

Several names similar to it are found in the Peten district. On Lake
Yaxta, are the ruins of the very ancient city Napeten, and that lake may
have once been called "Chac-napeten," "the water of Napeten." Again, on
the road from Peten to Bacalar is the town Chacnabil, and the compound
_Chacnabiltan_ would mean "toward or in the direction of Chacnabil" (see
_Itinerarios y Leguarios que proceden de Merida, etc._, p. 15, Merida,
1851). The Itzas always remembered the Peten district, and when they met
with reverses in northern Yucatan, they returned to it and established
an important State there, which was not destroyed until the last decade
of the seventeenth century.

3. _Hunpel haab minan ti hokal haab_, "one year lacking from five score
years."

The name Ahmekat is probably an old form for _ahmeknah_ or _ahmektan_,
both of which are given in the _Diccionario de Motul_ for chieftain,
leader, captain.

4. _Lai tun_, the relative _lai_ with the particle _tun_, which is
called by Beltran a "particula adornativa." _uchci_ is the aorist of the
defective verb _uchul_, _uchi_, _uchuc_, to happen, to take place, come
to pass. _Emob_ is the third plural of _emel_, to descend, to disembark,
arrive. Pio Perez translates the phrase _ca emob uay lae_, "luego
bajaron aqui." As this was written in the province of Mani, the "here"
now refers in a narrower sense to the vicinity of the writer. The word
_chuulte_ I take to be an error of transcription for _uchci_, as it is
so translated by Pio Perez. It is noteworthy that the word _chicpahci_,
"discovered," conveys the sense that Chichen Itza was already in
existence when the migration here recorded reached northen[TN-15]
Yucatan. It is from _chicul_, a sign or mark by which something is
recognized.

Of the proper names in this section Bakhalal, "the canebrakes" (_halal_,
the cane, _bak_, a roll or enclosure), is the modern province of
Bacalar, on the east coast of the peninsula. _Ziyan caan_ appears to be
used as a synonym of it, or else refers to a part of it. Its meaning is
a picturesque reference to the view from the sea shore, where the
horizon is clearly defined, and the sky seems to rise from the water,
"the birth of the sky;" _Ziyan_, birth, _caan_, sky.

The name Chi Cħeen Itza was that of one of the grandest ancient cities
of Yucatan. _Cħeen_ is the name applied to a tract of low-lying fertile
land, especially suitable to the production of cacao (Berendt); _chi_ is
edge or border. It is therefore a name referring to a locality, "on the
border of the _cħeen_ of the Itzas." _Cħeen_ also means well or cistern,
and another derivation is "at the mouth of the well," as _chi_ can also
be rendered "mouth;" either of these is appropriate to the features of
the locality, as it is a fertile low-lying tract with two large natural
reservoirs near by.

5. _Paxi_, from _paaxal_, a neuter form of the active verb _pa_, to
break in pieces; it means "to go to pieces, to fall in ruins, to be
depopulated or deserted." Applied to a city it is often translated "to
be destroyed," but it does not convey quite so positive a meaning.
_Kuyan uincob_, "men of God," from _Ku_ the general name for Divinity.
Chichen Itza was one of the chief centres of religious life in Yucatan,
and its priests were esteemed among the most learned in the peninsula.

The name Chanputun, Champoton, or, reversed, Potonchan, is derived by
Gomara from the Nahuatl _potonia_, to smell badly, and _chan_, house (in
composition). Elsewhere, however, we find it in the form Chakanputun,
and this is Maya. _Chakan_ is the term applied to a grassy plain, a
savanna, and it was especially applied to the ancient province in which
the city of Ho, now Merida, was situated, as appears from the following
entry in the _Diccionario de Motul, MS._

"AHCHAKAN: el que es de Mérida, o de los pueblos de aquella comarca, que
se llama _Chakan_."

The correct form of the name is probably _Chakan peten_, the savanna
region.

6. The only obscure expression in this section is _yalan che, yalan
aban, yalan ak_. This often recurs in the ancient Maya manuscripts, and
was evidently a well-known formula, probably the refrain of one of their
ancient chants. In Mr. Stephens' translation it is rendered "under the
uninhabited mountains" (!) which is an attempt to render Pio Perez's
words "bajo los montes despoblados," "in the uninhabited forests."
_Aban_ or _haban_ is an obsolete word, only found in compounds, as
_yoxhaban_, huts made of branches. Both it and _ak_ were the names of
various branches or twigs. The phrase is literally "under the trees,
under the branches, under the foliage," and meant that those who thus
lived were homeless and houseless. It is a striking testimony to the
love of solid buildings and walled cities which characterized the Mayas.

I will add a verse from a curious prophetic chant in one of the Books of
Chilan Balam, where this expression occurs, and which is an interesting
example of these strange songs.

TZOLAH TI AHKIN CHILAM.

(_Recital of the priest Chilam._)

    Uien, uien, a man uah;
    Uken, uken, a man haa;
    Tu kin, puz lum pach,
    Tu kin, tzuch lum ich,
    Tu kin, naclah muyal,
    Tu kin, naclah uitz,
    Tu kin, chuc lum ɔiic,
    Tu kin, hubulhub,
    Tu kin, coɔ yol chelem,
    Tu kin, eɔeleɔ,
    Tu kin, ox ɔalab u nak yaxche,
    Tu kin, ox chuilab xotem,
    Tu kin, pan tzintzin
    Yetel banhob yalan che yalan haban.

_Translation._

    Eat, eat, thou hast bread;
    Drink, drink, thou hast water;
    On that day, dust possesses the earth,
    On that day, a blight is on the face of the earth,
    On that day, a cloud rises,
    On that day, a mountain rises,
    On that day, a strong man seizes the land,
    On that day, things fall to ruin,
    On that day, the tender leaf is destroyed,
    On that day, the dying eyes are closed,
    On that day, three signs are on the tree,
    On that day, three generations hang there,
    On that day, the battle flag is raised,
    And they are scattered afar in the forests.

7. _Heɔob_, from _heɔ_, _heɔel_ or _eɔ_, to fix firmly, to settle, to
found: _heɔel ca cah uaye_, let us settle here, "poblamos aqui" (_Dicc.
de San Francisco_, MS.).

8. The founding of Uxmal by Ahcuitok Tutulxiu is recorded in this
paragraph; _ahcui_ is the name of a species of owl, _tok_ is the flint
stone. By some old writers Uxmal is spelled Oxmal, which would give the
meaning "to pass thrice," _ox_, three, _mal_, to pass. From _mal_,
preterite _mani_, also was derived the name of the chief city of the
Tutulxiu, with a peculiar signification explained in a note on a
previous page.

Mr. Stephens has taken considerable pains to prove that Uxmal with its
astonishing edifices was inhabited at and after the conquest (_Incidents
of Travel in Yucatan_, Vol. II, p. 259); there may, indeed, have been an
Indian village there, but the first European traveler who has left us a
description of it, and who visited it in 1586, when many natives, born
before the conquest, were still living, describes the massive buildings
as even then in ruins, and very large trees growing upon them. An old
Indian told him that according to their traditions, these structures had
at that time been built nine hundred years, and that their builders had
left the country nearly that long ago. (_Relacion Breve y Verdadera de
algunas cosas de las muchas qui[TN-16] sucedieron al Padre Fray Alonzo
Ponce_, in the _Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de España_,
vol. LVIII, p. 461.)

The phrase _u heɔicab Ahcuitok Tutulxiu Uxmal_ is translated by Pio
Perez "se pobló en Uxmal," [TN-17]established himself in Uxmal,"
conveying the impression that he merely moved to that city. This is,
however, not the sense of the original. _Heɔicab_ is an active verb
governing Uxmal as its direct object, and means to found firmly or
promptly.

The expression _halach uinicil_, the real man, the true man, is a common
idiom for governor or ruler, he being the only "real man" in an
autocratic community (ante p. 26).

The name of Mayapan is given in the form Mayalpan, which I think is
dialectic. It is spoken of as an established city under the joint rule
of several chiefs at the date of the founding of Uxmal.

9. This paragraph describes how the ruler of the Itzas lost his share in
the government of Mayapan. _Kebanthan_, literally a plot, or to plot to
do some injury--"concertar de hacer algun mal, y el tal concierto,"
_Diccionario de Motul_, MS. I have followed Pio Perez in translating
"against Hunac Eel," although "by Hunac Eel" seems more correct.
Elsewhere the name is Hunac Ceel. Ancona argues that he was a member of
the Cocom family (_Hist. de Yucatan_, I. p. 157.)

Several of the names of the seven "men of Mayapan" have a Nahuatl
appearance. Kakaltecat=Cacaltecatl, He of the Crow; Ytzcuat=Itzcoatl,
Smirch-faced snake; Xuchueuet=Xochitl, the rose or flower;
Pantemit=Pantenamitl, the Conqueror of the city wall. These would seem
to bear out what Landa and Herrera say, to the effect that at one period
the rulers of Mayapan invited Aztec warriors from the province of
Tabasco to come and dwell in the city and aid them in controlling the
inhabitants.

Both Dr. Valentini and Señor Pio Perez are of opinion the Katuns at the
commencement of this paragraph should read the 10th, 8th and 6th,
instead of the 11th, 9th and 6th, as it is necessary in order to
establish consistency with what follows.

10. This is one of the most obscure sections in the chronicle. The
phrase _tumenel u uahal uahob_ is rendered by Pio Perez "because he made
war," while Brasseur translates it "because of his great feasts." The
meaning of the root _uah_ is maize cakes, or, more generally, bread. The
_Diccionario de Motul_ gives: "UAHIL; banquete, convite ô comida," which
is in favor of Brasseur's translation.

_Oxlahun uuɔ_, "thirteen divisions;" _uuɔ_ or _uuuɔ_ means literally a
fold or double, and hence appears to have been applied to ranks of men
in double rows. I do not find, however, any such meaning given in the
dictionaries. As a numeral particle it is used to count whatever occurs
in folds or doubles.

The number thirteen had a sacredness attached to it, from its frequent
use in the calendar. It appears from a passage in the _Popol Vuh_ that
the Cakchiquels, Pokomams and Pokomchis also divided their tribes into
thirteen sections (_Popol Vuh_, p. 206). In the Maya language, 13 is
also used to signify a great but indefinite number: thus _oxlahun
cacab_, thirteen generations, is equivalent to "forever"; _oxlahun
pixan_, thirteen times happy, is to be happy in the supreme degree; more
remote from customary analogies is the phrase for "full moon," _oxlhaun
caan u_, literally "the thirteen-sky moon," the moon which fills with
its light the whole sky (_Diccionario de Motul_, MS.).

The phrase _u ɔabal u natob_ is not translated at all in the English
rendering in Stephens' _Travels_, nor in that of Valentini. Brasseur
paraphrases it "by him who gives intelligence."

The proper names Ulmil and Ulil seem both to be derived from _ula_,
host, the master of the feast.

Here, again, I shall give the originals of the two previous translators.

_Translation of Pio Perez._

"En este mismo periodo ô _katun_ del 8º ahau fueron á destruir al rey
Ulmil porque le hacia la guerra al rey de Izamal Ulil. Trece divisiones
de combatientes tenia cuando los dispersó Hunac-eel para escarmentarlos:
la guerra se concluyó en el 6º ahau á los 34 años."

_Translation of Brasseur._

"C'est dans la même période du Huit Ahau qu'ils allèrent attaquer le roi
Ulmil, à cause de ses grands festins avec Ulil, roi d'Ytzmal: ils
avaient treize divisions de troupes, lorsqu'ils furent défaits par
Hunac-Eel, par celui qui donne l'intelligence. Au Six Ahau, c'en etait
fait, après trente quatre ans."

The name Hunac Eel should be Hunac Ceel, as it is given in the other
chronicles. It means "he who causes great fear," _hunac_ in composition
means much, great, and _ceel_, cold, also the fright and terror which
makes one shiver as with cold ("espanto, asombro ô turbacion que causa
frió." _Dicc. de Motul_, MS).[TN-18]

11. This important section describes the destruction of the great city
of Mayapan, which occurred somewhere between A.D. 1420-1450. The reasons
given for the act are not clear.

_Tumenel u pack tulum, tumenel multepal ich cah Mayalpan_, appears to me
to have the precise meaning I have given in the text; but Pio Perez
translates the passage thus "fué invadido por los hombres de Itza y su
rey Ulmil, el territorio fortificado de Mayalpan, porque tenia murallas,
y porque gobernaba en comun el pueblo de aquella ciudad."

The expression _multepal_, from _mul_, to do an act jointly, or in
common, and _tepal_, to govern, is interesting as showing that the
government of the country in its golden days of prosperity was not one
of an autocratic monarch, but a league or confederation of the principal
chiefs of the peninsula. This is also borne out by the descriptions of
the ancient government to be found in the pages of Landa and Herrera.

The Itzas seized the territory in and around Mayapan, but they were not
the ones who destroyed the city. This was the work of _Ahuitzilɔul_,
foreign mountaineers. _Ɔul_, is the common term for a foreigner in Maya,
and is now-a-days applied especially to the whites. _Uitz_, mountain, is
used with reference to the high sierra which runs through central
Yucatan, and so Pio Perez understood _ahuitzil_, "los que tenian sus
ciudades en la parte montañosa." This is probably correct, though we do
not know to whom this appellation refers. Yet it may be added that
another meaning can be given to the phrase; _uitz_ is the term applied
by the natives in some parts of the peninsula to the artificial mounds
or pyramids on which their temples were situated, which are usually
called _muul_.[132-1] In this sense _ahuitzil ɔul_ should be rendered
"foreigners who had great pyramids."

The words _tan cah Mayapan_ (not Mayalpan as before) are rendered by Pio
Perez and Brasseur as the name of a province or district; but as they
simply mean "in the middle of the city of Mayapan," it appears to be
their signification here.

12. "After the fortress was depopulated" or destroyed. This no doubt
refers to the fortress of Mayapan, spoken of in the previous section.
Aguilar and his companions were wrecked on the coast of Yucatan, in
1511, and this is probably the earliest date of any actual landing of
Europeans, although in 1506, Pinzon had sighted the eastern shores.

13. _Mayacimil_, "the death of the Mayas," a term applied to a general
and fatal pestilence. Such are referred to by Landa (_Relacion_, § X.)
and Cogolludo (_Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. IV, cap. VI),[TN-19] The
_Diccionario de Motul_, MS. has this entry:

"MAYACIMIL: una mortandad grande que fué en Yucatan. Y tomase por
qualquier mortandad y pestilencia que lleva mucha gente."

_Noh kakil_, _noh_, great, _kak_, fire, is the usual word for the
smallpox.

The reference to the death of Ahpula, who, as we learn from another
chronicle, was a member of the royal Xiu family, is especially valuable
as assigning a definite date in both the Maya and European calendars. It
is specified with great minuteness, and yet Pio Perez made the serious
error in his computations regarding the Maya calendar of reading "the
sixth year of the 13th ahau" instead of "six years from the close of the
13th ahau," as, in fact, he himself elsewhere translated it.

The expression _u xocol haab ti lakin cuchie_, "the reckoning of the
year was toward the East," refers to the circle or wheel marked with the
four cardinal points by which the years were arranged with reference to
the four "year-bearers" Kan, Muluc, Ix and Cauac.

The last words of this section, "sixty years after the fortress was
destroyed," are an obvious error, as in the preceding section this date
is said to be that of the first arrival of the Spaniards.

14. _Kul uincob_, "mighty men," from _kul_, strong, powerful, probably
akin to _ku_, god, but not with the religious signification which
_kuyen_ has (see page 125). _Caputzihil_, literally "to be born a second
time." Bishop Landa assures us positively that a rite of baptism was
known to the Mayas before the arrival of the whites, and that this name
was applied to it (_Relacion_, p. 144). As will be seen on a later page,
Maya writers usually employed another term to express Christian baptism.

The year in which Bishop Francisco Toral first came to Yucatan was 1562
(Cogolludo, _Hist. de Yucatan_, Lib. VI, cap. VI). He died in Mexico in
1571.

The remainder of this chronicle has never been translated or published.
It refers to facts after the Conquest, but I think it of interest to
give it completely, as its manner of dealing with known dates will throw
light on its general accuracy.

15. Bishop Diego de Landa, second bishop of the diocese of Merida, died
at that city in 1579, aged fifty-four years. The first missionaries that
came to Mani were Fathers Villalpando and Benavente, in 1547 (Cogolludo,
_Hist._, Lib. V, cap. VII). The convent there was established in 1549.

16. No town of the name Yokhaa is now known. But I find on the ancient
native map of Mani, dating from 1557, given by Stephens (_Travels in
Yucatan_, Vol. II, p. 264), a locality marked _Yokha_, marked with a
cross. This is no doubt the reference in the text.

17. The Auditor Don Tŏmas Lopez came to Yucatan from Guatemala. He was
in Yucatan as early as 1552, and published laws in that year (Cogolludo,
Lib. V, cap. XIX, Lib. VII, cap. XI). A hospital was founded very early
in Mani, according to Cogolludo, but he does not give the exact date
(_ibid._, Lib. IV, cap. XX).

18. Doctor Don Diego Quijada arrived in Yucatan in 1562, and remained
until 1565.

19. When Landa was provincial, 1562-65, various Indians were hanged on
account of the prevalence of suicide.

20. What Marshall is referred to is uncertain, _thulub_ should probably
be _chulub_, and so I have translated it. Berendt suggested _ca botab
chulub_, "when they paid for water," the reference being to a great
drought.

21. An epidemic of measles and smallpox, in 1609, is referred to by
Cogolludo (Lib. IX, cap. I).

22. In 1610 three Indians of Tekax were hanged for having killed their
chief Don Pedro Xiu (Cogolludo, Lib. IX, cap. I).

23. The reference is to a census or assessment of the town. None is
mentioned in this year by Cogolludo, nor does he speak of the Judge
Diego Pareja.


FOOTNOTES:

[89-1] "No lo pudiendo sufrir los otros Señores, se conjuraron con el
Señor de los Tutuxius, i acudiendo en Dia señalado à la Casa del Señor
Cocom, le mataron con sus Hijos, salvo uno, que estaba ausente, i le
saquearon la Casa, i le tomaron sus Heredades, i desamparon la Ciudad
[de Mayapan], deseando cada Señor vivir en libertad en sus Pueblos, al
cabo de quinientos Años, que se fundò, en la qual havian vivido con
mucha Policia; i havria que se despoblò, segun la cuenta de los Indios,
hasta que llegaron los Castellanos à Yucatàn, setenta Años. Cada Señor
procurò de llevar los mas Libros de sus Ciencias, que pudò, à su Tierra,
adonde hicieron Templos; i esta es la principal causa de los muchos
Edificios, que hai en Yucatan. Siguiò toda su gente Ahxiui, Señor de los
Tutuxius, i poblò en Mani, que quiere decir, ià pasò; como si dixese,
hagamos Libro nuevo; i de tal manera poblaron sus Pueblos, que hicieron
una gran Provincia, que se llama oi dia, Tutuxiù." Herrera, _Historia de
las Indias Occidentales_, Dec. IV, Lib. X, caps. II, III.

[90-1] _Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. III, cap. VI.

[91-1] I quote Dr. Berendt's words. "Los datos historicós que publicò
Stephens en el Apendice de su obra fueron extractados de tal libro de
Chilam Balam en poder de un Indio de Mani, maestro de escuela, que por
tener el mismo apelido Balam pretendió ser descendiente del sacerdote de
los Mayas que llegó à padrinar esta clase de escritos." _Chilam Balam,
Articulos y Fragmentos en Lengua Maya_ MSS., Advertencia, p. vii.

I have also in my collection a manuscript copy of what Yucatecan
scholars call the _Codice Perez_, a mass of materials copied by Señor
Pio Perez, among them this chronicle. The following is his own note at
its close:--

"Hasta aqui termina el libro titulado Chilambalam que se conserva en el
Pueblo de Mani en poder del maestro de Capilla."

[92-1] _The Katunes of Maya History_, A Chapter in the Early Chronology
of Central America, with special reference to the Pio Perez Manuscripts.
By Philip J. J. Valentini, Ph. D. _Proceedings of the American
Antiquarian Society_, 1879. (Worcester, Mass. Press of Charles Hamilton,
1880). The reprint is 60 pages, octavo.

[92-2] Crescencio Carrillo, _Manual de Historia y Geografia de la
Peninsula de Yucatan_, pp. 16-27. (12mo: Merida de Yucatan; imprenta de
J. D. Espinosa e Hijos.)

[95-1] chichcunahthan.

[96-1] uchuc.

[96-2] haban.

[96-3] ximbal.

[97-1] ximbal.

[99-1] chulub.

[116-1] The Spanish word "poblar" does not mean to people an uninhabited
country, but to found villages and gather the people into communities.

[120-1] _Historia de las Indias Occidentales Dec._ IV, Lib. X, cap. II.

[121-1] _Cacal_ is reduplicated from _cab_, land, province, town. The
change from _b_ to _l_ is also seen in _cacalluum_, "tierra buena para
sembrar," _Diccionario de Motul_; also in the town names Tixcacal,
Xcacal, etc.

[132-1] "En toda la Peninsula existen unos cerros á mano ô monticulos
artificiales, que comunmente llaman los naturales en idioma Maya _Muul_
en algunos lugares, y en otros _Uitz_." Don Jose T. Cervera in the
_Revista de Merida_, Dec. 3, 1871.




II. THE SERIES OF THE KATUNS.

_From the Book of Chilan Balam of Tizimin._


Tizimin is a town of some importance, in the district of Valladolid,
about a hundred miles east of Merida. The "Book of Chilan Balam" which
was found there is one of the most ancient known, and appears to have
been written about the close of the sixteenth century. It is now in the
possession of the eminent antiquary, the Canon Crescencio Carrillo y
Ancona, of Merida, who has described it in his work on Maya
literature.[136-1] It contains 26 leaves, without numeration, and on the
17th this chronicle is inserted without title or prefatory remarks. It
is evidently a version of that previously given from the Book of Mani,
although a few additional particulars are stated, and there seems to
have been an attempt to arrange the epochs in more completeness.

This has led to the insertion of a number of katuns which I think it
evident do not properly come into the count. To correct the list the
katuns 8th, 6th, and 4th, mentioned in §2, should be considered the same
as 8th, 6th, and 4th, repeated in §3 and §4. Again, in section 11, the
8th katun, on which the attack on Mayapan occurs, is to be considered
the same as the 8th with which §12 begins, and the whole of the 25
katuns which are either stated to have intervened, or must be added in
order to make the series correct, are to be omitted. Finally, the 8th
katun at the close of §10 should immediately follow the 10th at the
close of §8.


TEXT.

 1. Uaxac ahau.

    Uac ahau[TN-20]

    Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau--[138-1]cakal hab catac humppel hab tu humpiztun
    ahoxlahunahau.

 2. Oxlahun ahau.

    Uaxac ahau.

    Uac ahau.

    Ca ahau; kuchci chacnabiton mekat tutul xiu, humppel hab mati hokal
    hab.

 3. Uaxac ahau; uch cuchi [138-2]canpahal chicħen Ytza; uch cu chicpahal
    tzucubte Zian can lae.

 4. Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau; lai tzolci pop.

 5. Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau; lahunkal hab cu tepal chicħen Ytza, ca paxi ca binob t
    cahtal chakanputun ti yanhi yotochob ahYtzaob kuyan uinicobi.

 6. Uac ahau; chuccu lumil chakanputun.

    Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau.

    Lahca ahau.

    Lahun ahau.

    Uaxac ahau; paxci chakanputun; oxlahunkal hab cu tepal chacanputun
    tumen Ytza [139-1]unincob; ca talob u tzaclob yotochob tucaten; ca u
    zatahob be chakanputun; lay u katunil [139-2]biciob ahYtzaob yalan
    che, yalan haban, yalan ak ti numyaob.

 7. Vac ahau.

    Can ahau; cakal hab ca talob u heɔ yotochob tu caten; ca u zatahob
    be chankanputun.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Vuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau.

    Lahca ahau.

 8. Lahun ahau; u heɔcicab ahzuitok tutulxiu uxmal; lahunkal hab cuchi
    ca heɔiob lum Uxmal.

 9, 10. Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau.

    Lahca ahau.

    Lahun ahau.

    Uaxac ahau; paxci u halach vinicil chicħen Ytza tu kebanthan hunac
    ceel, ah zinte yut chan, tzumte cum, taxal, pantemit, xuchvevet,
    Itzcoat, kakal cat, lai u kaba u uinicilob lae uuctulob tumen u uahal
    uahob y ytzmal ulil ahau: oxlahun uuɔ u katunilob ca paxob tumen
    hunac ceel, tumen u ɔabal u natob.

11. Uac ahau.

    Can ahau; cakal hab ca chuci u lumil ahau, tumen u kebanthan hunac
    ceel.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau.

    Lahca ahau.

    Uaxac ahau; uchci puchtun ich paa Mayapan tumen u pach tulum, tu tumen
    multepal ich cah mayapan.

    Uac ahau.

    Cabil ahau; oxlahun tun mani ɔulob u yaxil cob u lumil Yucatan
    tzucubte; cankal hab catac oxlahun pizi.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Ho ahau.

    Ox ahau.

    Hun ahau.

    Lahca ahau.

    Lahun ahau,[TN-21]

    Uaxac ahau.

    Uac ahau.

    Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

12. Uaxac ahau; paxci cah mayapan tumenel vitzil ɔul; lahunkal hab
    catac cankal habi.

13. Can ahau; uchi maya cimlal ocnalkuchil ych paa.

    Cabil ahau; uchci nohkakil.

    Oxlahun ahau; [142-1]uchci cimil ahpulha, uacppel hab u binel ca
    ɔococ u xol oxlahun ahau cuchie, ti yan u xocol hab ti lakin
    cuchie, canil kan, cumlahi pop hool han, tu holhun zip catac oxppeli,
    bolon imix u kinil cimci ahpulha laitun hab=1536 cuchi.

14. Buluc ahau; ulci ɔulob----kul uincob ti lakin u talob ca ulob uai
    tac lumile.

    Bolon ahau; hopci xptianoil; uchci caputzihil; lai li ichil u katunil
    ulci yax obispo toral heix hab cu [142-2]xinbal cuchie--1544.

15. Vuc ahau; cimci obispo Landa ichil u katunil.

16. Ho ahau, ca yum cahi padre mani lai hab cu ximbal cuchi la--1550;
    lai hab cu ximbal ca cahiob yok ha, 1552 cuchi.

17. 1559, hab ca uli oydor ca paki spital.

18. 1560, u habil ca uli Doctor quixada yax halach uinic uai ti lume.

19. 1562, hab ca uchci chuitab.

20. 1563, hab ca uli mariscal.

21. 1569, hab ca uchi kakil.

22. 1619, u habil ca hichi u cal [143-1]ahkaxob.

23. 1611, hab ca ɔibtabi cah tumenel Jues.


TRANSLATION.

 1. The eighth ahau.

    The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau; four score years and one year to the first year of the
    thirteenth ahau.

 2. The thirteenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau.

    The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau; Mekat Tutulxiu arrived at Chacnabiton; five score
    years lacking one year.

 3. The eighth ahau; it occurred that Chichen Itza was learned about; the
    discovery of the province of Zian can took place.

 4. The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau; then Pop was counted in order.

 5. The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau; ten score years they ruled Chichen Itza, then it was
    destroyed and they went to live at Chakanputun, where were the houses
    of those of Itza, holy men.

 6. The sixth ahau; the land of Chakanputun was seized.

    The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau.

    The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau; Chakanputun was abandoned; for thirteen score years
    Chakanputun was ruled by the men of Itza; then they came in search of
    their houses a second time; and they lost the road to Chakanputun; in
    this katun those of Itza were under the trees, under the boughs,
    under the branches, to their sorrow.

 7. The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau: two score years, and they came and established their
    houses a second time; when they lost the road to Chakanputun.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau.

    The twelfth ahau.

 8. The tenth ahau; Ahzuitok Tutulxiu founded Uxmal: ten score years had
    passed when they established the territory of Uxmal.

 9, 10. The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau.

    The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau; the ruler deserted (depopulated) Chichen Itza, on
    account of the plot of Hunac Ceel; Ahzinteyut Chan, Tzumtecum, Taxal,
    Pantemit, Xuchueuet, Itzcoat, Kakalcat, these were the names of the
    seven men; on account of the banquet with Ulil, ruler of Itzmal;
    there were thirteen divisions of warriors when they were driven out
    by Hunac Ceel, in order that they might know what was to be given.

11. The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau: two score years; then the ruler seized the land on
    account of the plot of Hunac Ceel.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau.

    The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau; fighting took place in the fortress Mayapan, on
    account of the seizure of the castle, and on account of the joint
    government in the city of Mayapan.

    The sixth ahau.

    The second ahau; on the thirteenth foreigners passed, they say for
    the first time, to this land, the province Yucatan; four score years
    and thirteen.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.

    The first ahau.

    The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau.

    The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

12. The eighth ahau; Mayapan was depopulated by foreigners from the
    mountains; ten score years and four score years.

13. The fourth ahau; the pestilence, the general death, took place in
    the fortress.

    The second ahau; the smallpox took place.

    The thirteenth ahau; the death of Ahpulha took place; it was the
    sixth year when ended the count of the thirteenth ahau; the count of
    the year was from the east, (the month) Pop passed on the fifth kan;
    on the eighteenth of (the month) Zip, 9 Imix, was the day Ahpulha
    died; it was the year 1536.

14. The eleventh ahau; foreigners arrived--mighty men from the east;
    they came, they arrived here in this land.

    The ninth ahau; Christianity began; baptism took place; also in this
    katun came the first bishop Toral; the year which was passing
    was--1544.

15. The seventh ahau; bishop Landa died in this katun.

16. The fifth ahau; the Fathers settled at Mani; the year that was
    passing was 1550; in the year 1552 they settled upon the water.

17. 1559; this year came the auditor and built the Hospital.

18. 1560; this year arrived Doctor Quixada, the first governor here in
    this land.

19. 1562; this year took place the hanging.

20. 1563; this year came Mariscal.

21. 1569; this year smallpox occurred.

22. 1610; this year those of Tekax were hanged.

23. 1611; this year the towns were written down by the Judge.


NOTES.

The entire omission of the introductory paragraph of the Mani chronicle,
with its references to the Quetzalcoatl myth, is noteworthy.

As neither chronicle begins with the beginning of an Ahau Katun, it is
obvious that some era was fixed upon in later days from which to count
the Katuns backward in time to the dawn of tradition, as well as
forward.

2. On the name _Chacnabiton_ see page 123.

3. _Canpahal_ I take to be an old form of _canchahal_ or _canlaahal_,
both of which mean to learn or learn about. On _Zian can_ see page 124.

4. I am at a loss for the exact bearing of the expression _lai tzolci
Pop_. Pop is the first month in the Maya year; _tzoolol_ is "to be
counted in order" (_Dicc. Motul_); the preterite in _ci_ would seem to
justify the rendering "since then Pop was counted in regular
succession;" (see remarks on the effect of _ci_, on page 106); in other
words, that the calendar was adopted at that time, which was also at the
beginning of an Ahau Katun, and, by the count given (supplying the
katuns not mentioned by the writer) thirty katuns, 600 years, since
their traditions began.

6. _Chuccu_, passive of _chucah_, to seize, take possession of.

_Zatahob be_, "they lost the road," probably meant, in a figurative
sense, that they were prevented by intervening unfriendly tribes from
continuing their intercourse with the western coast. _Biciob_, evidently
for _binciob_. The expression _yalan che_, _yalan haban_, _yalan ak_,
has already been explained (page 126).

13. _Ocnakuchil._ The derivation of this word is stated to be from
_ocol_, to enter, _na_, the houses, _kuch_, the crow or buzzard, the
number of the dead being so great that the carrion birds entered the
dwellings to prey upon the bodies.

In the account of Ahpula's death _ca ɔococ_ should, I think, read _ca
ma ɔococ_, "when not yet was ended."


FOOTNOTES:

[136-1] _Disertacion sobre la Historia de la Lengua Maya ò Yucateca_, in
the _Revista de Merida_, 1870, p. 128.

[138-1] cankal.

[138-2] canlaahal.

[139-1] uinicob.

[139-2] binciob.

[142-1] uchuc.

[142-2] ximbal.

[143-1] tikaxob.




III. THE RECORD OF THE COUNT OF THE KATUNS.

_From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel._


The village of Chumayel is about six leagues east of Mani, and within
the boundaries of the province anciently ruled by the Xiu family.

The copy of the Book of Chilan Balam which was found there was a
redaction made by an Indian, Don Juan Josef Hoil, in 1782. Like all
these volumes it is a sort of common place book, in which were copied
miscellaneous articles from much older manuscripts. One of these bears
the date 1689, but most of them have no date attached. Hoil's original
is, I believe, in the possession of the Canon Crescencio Carrillo y
Ancona, of Merida. A fac-simile copy, by the hand of the late Dr.
Berendt, is in my possession.

At the close of the volume, ff. 40-44, are found three summaries of the
ancient history of Yucatan, which are those I am about to give. They
have never been translated from the original, nor published in any form,
and they contain details of interest. They are evidently from different
sources, and are also different from those previously given.


TEXT.

U kahlay u xocan katunob uchi u chictahal u Chicħeen Ytza uchi lae lay
ɔiban ti cab lae uchebal yoheltabal tumen hijmac yolah yohel te ti xocol
katun lae.

       *       *       *       *       *

1.   VI. Uac ahau uchci u chictahal u chicħeen Ytza.

   IIII. Can ahau lae.

     II. Cabil ahau.

   XIII. Oxlahun ahau tzolci pop.

     XI. Buluc ahau.

     IX. Bolon ahau.

    VII. Uuc ahau.

      V. Ho ahau.

    III. Ox ahau.

      I. Hun ahau.

    XII. Lahca ahau.

      X. Lahun ahau; paxci u chicħeen Ytza; uchi oxlahun uuɔ katun
         cacahi chakanputun ti yotochob u katunil.

       *       *       *       *       *

2.   VI. Uac ahau.

   IIII. Can ahau; chucci u lumil tumenob Chakanputun.

     II. Cabil ahau.

   XIII. Oxlahun ahau.

     XI. Buluc ahau.

     IX. Bolon ahau.

    VII. Uuc ahau.

      V. Ho ahau.

    III. Ox ahau.

      I. Hun ahau.

    XII. Lahca ahau.

      X. Lahun ahau.

   VIII. Uaxac ahau; paxci chakan putunob tumenob ah Ytza uinicob ca
         taliob u tzacle u yotochob tu caten; oxlahun uuɔ u katunil;
         cahanob chakan putunob tic yotochob; layli u katunil binciob
         ah Ytzaob yalan che, yalan haban, yalan ak, ti numyaob lae.

3.   VI. Uac ahau.

   IIII. Can ahau.

     II. Cabil ahau.

   XIII. Oxlahun ahau.

     XI. Buluc ahau.

     IX. Bolon ahau.

    VII. Uuc ahau.

      V. Ho ahau.

    III. Ox ahau.

      I. Hun ahau.

    XII. Lahca ahau.

      X. Lahun ahau.

   VIII. Uaxac ahau; paxci ahYtza uinicob ti yotochob tu caten, tumen u
         kebanthan hun nac ceel, tumen u uahal uahob _y_ ahYtzmal;
         oxlahunuuɔ u katunil cahanobi ca paxiob tumen hun nac ceel,
         tumen a ɔabal u natob ahYtzaob lae.

4.   VI. Uac ahau.

   IIII. Can ahau: chucci u luumil ichpaa Mayapan tumen AhYtza uinicob,
         likulob ti yotoche tumenel ahYtzmalob, tumen u kebanthan - - - -
         hun nac ceel lae.

5.   II. Cabil ahau.

   XIII. Oxlahun ahau.

     XI. Buluc ahau.

     IX. Bolon ahau.

    VII. Uuc ahau,[TN-22]

      V. Ho ahau.

    III. Ox ahau.

      I. Hun ahau.

    XII. Lahca ahau.

      X. Lahun ahau.

   VIII. Uaxac ahau: uchci pucħtun ychpaa Mayapan tumen u pach paa, u
         pach tulum, tumen multepal ych cah Mayapan lal lae.

6.   VI. Uac ahau.

   IIII. Can ahau: uchci mayacimlal; uchci ocnakuchil ych paa.

     II. Cabil ahau: uchci kakil nohkakile.

7. XIII. Oxlahun ahau; cimci Ahpula uacppel haab; u binel u xocol haab
         ti lakin cuchie; [156-1]caanil kan cumlahci pop ti lakin he
         tunte na cici pahool katun haab; hun hix cip catac oxppeli Bolon
         ymix hi; u kinil lay cimci Ahpula lae napotxiu tu habil _D^o._
         158 años.

8.   XI. Buluc ahau: hulciob kul uinicob ti lakin; u yah talzah; ulob u
         yaxchun uay lae luumil coon maya uinice tu habil _D^o._ 1523
         años.

     IX. Bolon ahau: hoppci _xpnoil_; uchci caputzihil; laytal ychil u
         katunil hulci _obispo_ tora [157-1]ua; xane hauci [157-2]huytabe
         tu habil _D^o._ 1546 años.

    VII. Uuc ahau: cimci _obispo de Landa_.

      V. Hoo ahau.

    III. Ox ahau.


TRANSLATION.

This is the Record of the count of the katuns from when took place the
discovery of Chichen Itza; this is written for the town in order that it
may be known by whoever wishes to know as to the counting of the katuns.

       *       *       *       *       *

1.   VI. In the sixth ahau took place the discovery of Chichen Itza.

   IIII. This is the fourth ahau.

     II. The second ahau.

   XIII. The thirteenth ahau; Pop was set in order.

     XI. The eleventh ahau.

     IX. The ninth ahau.

    VII. The seventh ahau.

      V. The fifth ahau.

    III. The third ahau.

      I. The first ahau.

    XII. The twelfth ahau.

      X. The tenth ahau; Chichen Itza was abandoned; at this time it took
         place that thirteen divisions of warriors went to Chakanputun
         for houses.

       *       *       *       *       *

2.   VI. The sixth ahau.

   IIII. The fourth ahau; the land was taken in possession by those of
         Chakanputun.

     II. The second ahau.

   XIII. The thirteenth ahau.

     XI. The eleventh ahau.

     IX. The ninth ahau.

    VII. The seventh ahau.

      V. The fifth ahau.

    III. The third ahau.

      I. The first ahau.

    XII. The twelfth ahau.

      X. The tenth ahau.

   VIII. The eighth ahau: Chakanputun was deserted by the men of Itza
         when they came in search of their houses for the second time;
         thirteen divisions of warriors dwelt in the houses at
         Chakanputun; in this katun those of Itza were under the trees,
         under the boughs, under the branches, to their misery.

3.   VI. The sixth ahau.

     IV. The fourth ahau.

     II. The second ahau.

   XIII. The thirteenth ahau.

     XI. The eleventh ahau.

     IX. The ninth ahau.

    VII. The seventh ahau.

      V. The fifth ahau.

    III. The third ahau.

      I. The first ahau.

    XII. The twelfth ahau.

      X. The tenth ahau.

   VIII. The eighth ahau: the men of Itza were driven out of their houses
         a second time because of the plot of Hunac Ceel, because of the
         festivities with those of Itzmal; thirteen divisions of warriors
         dwelt there when they were driven out by Hunnac Ceel in order
         that those of Itza might know what was to be given.

4.   VI. The sixth ahau.

   IIII. The fourth ahau; the territory of the fortress of Mayapan was
         seized by the men of Itza as also the houses by those of Itzamal
         because of the plotting - - - - of Hunnac Ceel.

5.   II. The second ahau.

   XIII. The thirteenth ahau.

     XI. The eleventh ahau.

     IX. The ninth ahau.

    VII. The seventh ahau.

      V. The fifth ahau.

    III. The third ahau.

      I. The first ahau.

    XII. The twelfth ahau.

      X. The tenth ahau.

   VIII. The eighth ahau: there was fighting in the fortress of Mayapan
         because of the seizure of the fortress and the fortified town by
         the joint government in the city of Mayapan.

6.   VI. The sixth ahau.

     IV. The fourth ahau: the pestilence took place, the general death took
         place in the fortress.

     II. The second ahau; the smallpox broke out.

7. XIII. The thirteenth ahau; Ahpula died the sixth year; the count of
         the years was toward the east: (the month) Pop began on 4 Kan to
         the east * * * * * 9 Imix was the day on which Ahpula NapotXiu
         died in the year of the Lord 158.

8.   XI. The eleventh ahau: the mighty men came from the East, they
         brought the sickness; they arrived for the first time in this
         country we Maya men say in the year 1513.

     IX. The ninth ahau: Christianity began; baptism took place; also in
         this katun arrived bishop Toral here; also the hanging ceased in
         the year 1546.

    VII. The seventh ahau; bishop Landa died.

      V. The fifth ahau.

    III. The third ahau.


NOTES.

The writer states, in a brief introduction, the nature and purpose of
his composition.

_U kahlay_, the record, or the memoir, from _kahal_, to remember. The
concrete meaning of the root is "to know by sight, to recognize."
_ɔiban_, past participle, passive voice, of _ɔib_ to write: the original
signification of the word is "to paint." _Yoheltabal_, passive form of
_ohel_, to know, which is always conjugated with the pronominal
prefixes, _u_, _a_, _y_. _Yolah_, syncopated form of _u uolah_, he
wills, wishes, _uol=volo_, _uolah=voluntas_.

It will be noticed that this chronicle is not called an "arrangement" of
the katuns, _tzolan katun_, but a count or reckoning of them, _xocan_ or
_xocol_, from _xoc_, to count.

1. The count begins with the discovery of Chichen Itza, mentions that
Pop was "counted in order" at the beginning of the next following Ahau
Katun, and having stated the desertion of Chichen Itza and the migration
to Chakanputun, the chronicler draws a line, as if to separate broadly
these occurrences from those which followed.

5. The distinction between _paa_ and _tulum_ appears to be that _tulum_
is an enclosure surrounded by a defensive wall, and this wall itself;
while _paa_ is a castle, or, in Maya land, a mound or pyramid with
buildings on it erected for purposes of defence.

6. _Kakil nohkakil_, the fire, the great fire, but here in the sense of
a contagious febrile disease, probably the smallpox.

7. The text in this section is corrupt, and I leave a line untranslated.
The writer informs us, what was omitted in the previous chronicles, that
the Ahpula whose death is so carefully mentioned by all, was a member of
the Xiu family which reigned over the province of Mani. They were almost
the first of the powerful Maya nobles to make friends with the
Spaniards. The date 158 is apparently intended for 1538, or perhaps
1508, which is more consistent with the following section, but less so
with the previous chronicles.

_Kul uinicob_, as remarked on page 133, means "the mighty men," not the
"holy men," as generally translated. The term was applied to the
Spaniards. The _Dicc. de Motul_ MS. says:--"KULVINIC: muy hombre, hombre
de respeto y de hecho, y llaman así los Indios á los Españoles." _U yah
talzah_, they bring the sickness, probably the smallpox. _Coon_ or
_con_, 1st pers. pl. pres. indic. of the irregular verb _cen_ (_cihi_,
_ciac_), to say, to tell.


FOOTNOTES:

[156-1] Canil.

[157-1] uay.

[157-2] chuytabe.




IV. THE MAYA KATUNS.

_From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel,_


The following chronicle is stated by its writer to be distinctively
called the "Maya Katuns," and to be written for (or by) the Itzas. We
have, therefore, no longer to do with the reckoning of the subjects of
the Xiu family who ruled at Mani, but with one which emanates from the
priests of the Cocomes, who were hereditary masters of Chichen Itza. It
is evidently of different origin, although many of the same facts are
referred to in it.


TEXT.

U kahlay katunob utial ahYtzaob mayakatun u kaba lae.

       *       *       *       *       *

1. Lahca ahau.

    Lahun ahau.

    Uaxac ahau.

    Uac ahau; paxciob ahoni.

    Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Hoo ahau; paxci u cah yahau ahYtzmal kinich kakmo _y_ pop hol chan
tumenel hun nac ceel.

    Ox ahau.

2. Hun ahau: paxci yala ahYtza tu cħicheen, tu yoxpiztun ychil hun ahau
paxci u chicħeen.

    Lahca ahau.

    Lahun ahau.

3. Uaxac ahau: u katunil heɔci cah yala ahYtza likul yan che yalan
haban tan xuluc mul u kaba ti likulob ca u heɔahob luum Zaclactun
Mayapan u kaba tu uucpiztun uaxac ahau u katunil; laix u katunil cimci
Chakanputun tumen kak u pa cal yetel tec uilue.

4. Uac ahau.

    Can ahau.

    Cabil ahau.

    Oxlahun ahau.

    Buluc ahau.

    Bolon ahau.

    Uuc ahau.

    Hoo ahau: ulci ɔul ti chibil uinic, yxma pic ɔul u kaba; ma paxci
peten tumenelobi.

    Ox ahau.

5. Hun ahau: paxci peten tan cah mayapan u kaba tu hunpiztun ychil hun
ahau u katunile; lukci halach uinic tutul _y_ u Batabilob cabe _y_
cantzuc culcahobe; lay u katunil paxi uincob tan cah [167-1]cauec
[167-2]chahiob u Batabilob cabe.

6. Lahca ahau te cħabi Otzmal u tunile.

    Lahun ahau, te cħabi Zizal u tunile.

    Uaxac ahau, te cħabi Kancaba u tunile.

    Uac ahau, te cħabi hunnacthi u tunile.

7. Can ahau, te cħabi atikuhe u tunilae; lay u katunil uchci mayacimlal
tu hopiztun ychil can ahau u katunil lae.

    Cabil ahau, te cħabi chacalna u tunile.

    Oxlahun ahau, te cħabi euan u tunile.

8. Buluc ahau, u yaxchun kin coloxpeten cħabi u tunile; laix u katunil
cimci Ahpula Napotxiu u kaba tu hunpiztun Buluc ahau. Laix u katunil yax
hulciob españolesob uay tac lumil lae tu uucpiztun Buluc ahau u katunil
tiix hoppi xpnoil lae tu habil quinientos diez y nueve años D^o 1519
a^s.

9. Bolon ahau ma cħabi u tunil lae; lay katun yax ulci obispo Fray
Fran^co [168-1]to Ral, huli tu uacpiztun ychil ahBolon ahau katun lae.

    Uac ahau, ma cħabi u tunil lae; lay u katunil cimci Obispo e landa
lae, tii xuli uhel Obispo xani.

    Hoo ahau.

    Ox ahau.


TRANSLATION.

The Record of the Katuns by the men of Itza called the Maya Katuns.

       *       *       *       *       *

1. The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

    The eighth ahau.

    The sixth ahau; the well dressed ones were driven out.

    The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau; the town was destroyed by Kinich kakmo, ruler of
Itzmal, and Pop Hol Chan on account of Hunnac Ceel.

    The third ahau.

2. The first ahau; the remainder of the Itzas at Chichen were driven
out; on the third year in the first ahau Chichen was depopulated.

    The twelfth ahau.

    The tenth ahau.

3. The eighth ahau; in this katun was founded a city by the remainder of
the Itzas coming out of the woods from under the branches, from the
midst of Xuluc Mul as it is called; they came from there and established
the land called Zaclactun Mayapan, in the seventh year of the eighth
Ahau katun; in this katun perished Chakanputun by fire, which destroyed
it quickly, and suddenly consumed it.

4. The sixth ahau.

    The fourth ahau.

    The second ahau.

    The thirteenth ahau.

    The eleventh ahau.

    The ninth ahau.

    The seventh ahau.

    The fifth ahau; foreigners came seeking men to eat; "breechless
foreigners" they were called; the country was not depopulated by them.

    The third ahau.

5. The first ahau; the district in the middle of Mayapan (or Tancah
Mayapan) was depopulated in the first year of the first ahau katun;
there went forth the governor Tutul, with the chiefs of the country and
four divisions from the towns; in this katun the men in the centre of
the town (or of Tancah) were driven out, and the chiefs of the country
lost their power.

6. The twelfth ahau: the stone of Otzmal was taken.

    The tenth ahau; the stone of Zizal was taken.

    The eighth ahau; the stone of Kancaba was taken.

    The sixth ahau; the stone of Hunnacthi was taken.

7. The fourth ahau; the stone of Ahtiku was taken; in this katun took
place the pestilence, in the fifth year in the fourth ahau katun.

    The second ahau; the stone of Chacalna was taken.

    The thirteenth ahau; the stone of Euan was taken.

8. The eleventh ahau: in the time of its beginning, the stone of
Coloxpeten was taken; in this katun died Ahpula Napotxiu, in the first
year of the eleventh ahau; it was also in this katun that the Spaniards
first arrived here in this land, in the seventh year of the eleventh
ahau katun; also Christianity began in the year fifteen hundred and
nineteen, the year of our Lord 1519.

9. The ninth ahau; no stone was taken at this time; in this katun first
came the bishop Brother Francisco Toral; he arrived in the sixth year of
the ninth ahau katun.

    The seventh ahau; no stone was taken: in this katun died Bishop Landa;
then also ended the bishop his successor.

    The fifth ahau.

    The third ahau.


NOTES.

1. The writer begins with the 12th ahau, although nothing is noted until
the 6th. Here we have the brief entry _paxciob ahoni_. This might be
translated "those of Oni were driven out or scattered." But no such
locality is known or mentioned elsewhere. The _Diccionario de Motul,
MS._ gives the meaning of _ahoni_ as "pulido, galan, muy bien vestido,"
_ahoni a talel ex_, "you come very well dressed." I suppose, therefore,
that it was a term applied to some early tribe who distinguished
themselves in comparison with their ruder neighbors by elegance of
costume. Later we shall find a similar term, "breechless foreigners,"
applied to another tribe whose condition of nudity suggested their
appellation.

The name Kinich Kakmo is mentioned by Cogolludo as that of an idol
worshiped at Itzamal. He says:--"They had another temple on another
mound in the northern part of the city, and this, from the name of an
idol which they worshiped here, they called _Kinich Kakmó_, which means
the sun with a face. They say that the rays were of fire and descended
at mid-day to consume the sacrifice, as the vacamaya flies through the
air (which is a bird something like a parrot, though larger in size, and
with finely colored feathers). They resorted to this idol in time of
mortality, pestilence or much sickness, both men and women, and brought
many offerings. They said that at mid-day a fire descended and consumed
the sacrifice in the sight of all. After this the priests replied to
their inquiries about the sickness, famine or pestilence, and thus they
learned their fate; although it often turned out quite the contrary of
what he predicted." (_Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. IV, cap. VIII.)

The title given by Cogolludo to the divinity appears to have also been
adopted by the ruling chief, who may also have been the high priest. It
is both imperfectly and incorrectly translated by the historian. Its
components are _kin_, the sun, day; _ich_, the eye, the face; _kak_,
fire; _moo_, the macaw, _Psittacus Macao_, deemed sacred throughout
Mexico and Central America, on account of its beautiful plumage. The
full translation of the name is "the Eye of Day, the Sacred Bird of
Fire," a symbolic name of a solar deity.

The Chan family is mentioned by Sanchez Aguilar (_Informe contra Idolum
Cultores_, etc.), as among the princely houses of Yucatan at the date of
the Conquest.

_Paxci u cah_, "the town," that is, Chichen Itza. The writer composed
his chronicle at that place, so he does not think it necessary to name
it specifically. The distance in a straight line from Chichen Itza to
Itzamal is 40 geographical miles.

2. _Yala_, the remainder, from _ala_, above, over. A portion of the
Itzas remained in Chichen after the attack by Kinich Kakmo; these also
now leave it.

3. The place _Xuluc mul_ is unknown in the present geography of the
peninsula. It means "the completed mounds," _mul_ being, as I have
before remarked, the name given to the artificial pyramids and tumuli of
stone so common in the peninsula, probably so called from the joint
labor of many in their construction.

The province of Zaclactun-Mayapan is also unknown, although there is a
hacienda Zaclactun within the boundaries of the modern district of
Itzamal (Berendt, _Nombres geograficos en Lengua Maya_, MS.). The name
apparently means "the place where white pottery is made."

4. _Ti chibil uinic_ "for men to be eaten;" _chibil_, the passive of
_chii_, to eat. The _Diccionario de Motul_ gives _chibil bak_, flesh to
be eaten. _Pic_ was the breech cloth or waist cloth, fastened around the
waist and falling to the knees, which was the common dress of the women.
The Dictionary just quoted translates the word, "naguas de Indias que se
sirven de saya ó faldellin ordinario, para cubrir desde la cintura
abajo; y son las blancas sin color ni bordado." The phrase _ixma pic
ɔul_, foreigners without a breech cloth, intimates that they were
nude.

Who were these naked cannibals, who raided the provinces in order to
obtain their unnatural food? Those daring navigators, those naked
man-eaters, the Caribs, from whose name our word _cannibal_ is derived,
at once suggest themselves. Curiously enough, the Abbe Brasseur has
argued for the probability of their invasions upon other (though I think
insufficient) grounds (see his _Informe acerca de las Ruinas de Mayapan
y de Uxmal_). This passage of the chronicle renders his theory probable.

5. _Peten tan cah Mayapan_ could also be rendered, "the district Tancah
Mayapan."

6. _Cħabi Otzmal u tunile_, "the stone of Otzmal was taken." Otzmal was
a locality under the rule of the Cocomes. (Cogolludo, _Historia_, Lib.
III, cap. VI.) Other versions read Itzmal and Uxmal. The reference is to
the _u heɔ katun_, the setting up of the Katun-stone as a memorial at
the end of each period of twenty years. Incomplete descriptions of this
ceremony are given by Landa, _Relacion_, § IX, and Cogolludo,
_Historia_, Lib. IV, cap. IV. I propose a more extended examination of
this question in a future volume of this series, devoted to documents
relating to the calendars and chronology of the Central American
nations.

8. The death of Ahpula Napot Xiu is given with minuteness but not in
accordance with previous chronicles. In 1519 Cortes touched at the
Island of Cozumel, and that might have been assumed as the date of the
commencement of Christianity.


FOOTNOTES:

[167-1] caua.

[167-2] cahiob.

[168-1] Toral.




V. THE CHIEF KATUNS.

_From the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel._


The document which follows is brief, but of peculiar interest. It does
not appear to aim at a connected history of events, but in the form of a
chant to refer certain incidents to the katuns in which they occurred.
It has more of a mythological character, and the repetitions remind one
of the refrain of a song.

It is also found in the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel, and is
inserted without explanation or introduction, copied, no doubt, from
some ancient writing.


TEXT.

1. Can ahau u kaba katun; uchci u zihilob----[178-1]pauaha en cuh u
yahauob.

2. [178-2]Oxhunte ti katun lic u tepalob, lay u kabaob tamuk u tepalob
lae.

3. Can ahau u kaba katun; emciob [178-3]noh hemal, [178-4]ɔeemal, u
kabaob lae.

4. Oxlahunte ti katun, lic u tepalob, lic u kabaticob, ti i ualac u
cutob. Oxlahun cuthi, u cutob lae.

5. Can ahau u katunil; uchci u caxanticob u chicħeen Ytzua; tii
utzcinnahi mactzil tiob tumen u yumoobe. Cantzuc lukciob cantzucul cab u
kabaob; likul ti likin kin colah peten bini huntzuci; [178-5]kul xaman
naco cob [178-6]hok huntzucci; heix hoki huntzucci holtun çuyuua ti
chikin; hoki huntzuccie canhek uitz, bolonte uitz u kaba u luumil lae.

6. Can ahau u katunil [178-7]uhci u payalob tu cantzuccilob can tzuccul
cab u kabaob, ca emiob tu chicħeen Ytzae ahYtza tun u kabaob. Oxlahunte
ti katun, lic u tepalob; ca oci u kebanthanobi tumen hunnac ceeli. Ca
paxci u calob. Ca biniob tan yol che tan xuluc mul, u kaba. Can ahau u
katunil; uchci yauat pixanobi. Oxlahunte ti katun lic u tepalobi y u
numyaobi.

7. Uaxac ahau u katunil; uchci yulelob yalaob ahYtza u kabaob. Ca ulob
tii ca ualac u tepalob Chakanputun. Oxlahun ahau u katunii u heɔob cah
mayapan mayauinic u kabaob. Uaxac ahau paxci u cahobi; ca uacchabi ti
peten tulacal. Uac katuni paxiob, ca haui u Maya kabaob. Buluc ahau u
kaba u katunil hauci u maya kabaob; Maya uinicob Christiano u kabaob
tulacal u cuchcabal tzo ma Sanc Pedro y Rey ahtepale.


TRANSLATION.

1. The fourth ahau was the name of the katun; the births took place;--;
the towns were taken possession of by the rulers.

2. It was the thirteenth katun in which they ruled; these were their
names while they ruled.

3. The fourth ahau was the name of the katun; in it they arrived, the
Great Arrival, the Less Arrival, as they are called.

4. It was the thirteenth katun in which they ruled, in which they took
names, at that time, while they resided here; in the thirteenth the
residence was continued, they resided here.

5. The fourth ahau katun; then took place the search for Chichen Itza;
at that time they were marvelously improved by the fathers. They went
forth in four divisions which were called the four territories. One
division came forth from the east of Kin Colah Peten; one division came
forth from the north of Nacocob; one division came forth from the gate
of Zuyuua to the west; one division came forth from the mountains of
Canhek, the Nine Mountains, as the land is called.

6. The fourth ahau katun; then took place the calling together of the
four divisions, the four territories as they were called, and they
arrived at Chichen Itza and were called the men of Itza. It was the
thirteenth katun in which they ruled; then the plottings were introduced
by Hunnac Ceel, and the territories were destroyed. Then they went into
the midst of the forests, into the midst of Xuluc Mul, so called. The
fourth ahau katun; then singing for their happiness took place. It was
the thirteenth katun in which they governed and had heavy labor.

7. The eighth ahau katun; thus it took place that there arrived the
remainder of the Itza men as they were called; then they arrived; and
about that time they governed Chakanputun. In the thirteenth ahau katun
those called the Maya men founded the city Mayapan. In the eighth ahau
the towns were destroyed; then they were driven wholly out of the
province. In the sixth katun they were destroyed, and it was ended with
those called Mayas. It was the eleventh ahau katun in which it ended
with those called Mayas. The Maya men were all called Christians and
came under the control of Saint Peter and the King, the rulers.


NOTES.

1. _U zihilob_, the births, probably meaning the beginning of things.
_Pauaha en cuh_ has no meaning that I can make out; I therefore suppose
it an error for _pachah u cah_, and translate in accordance with this
emendation. The phrase seems to refer to the first settlement of the
country, or to the first time the scattered inhabitants were gathered
together in towns by their chiefs.

2. "These were their names"; but no names are given. They seem to have
been omitted by the copyist.

3. _Emciob noh hemal ɔeemal_, faulty orthography for _noh emel, ɔeemel_,
the latter syncopated from _ɔeɔemel_. Literally, "since they descended;
the Great Descent, the Little Descent."

The tradition here referred to is given at more length by Father Lizana,
in his _Historia de Yucatan_, and is discussed also by Cogolludo
(_Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. IV, cap. III). As the work of the former is
wholly inaccessible, I quote from the reprint of a portion of it in
Brasseur's edition of Diego de Landa's _Relacion_ p. 354. "In former
times they called the East _Cen-ial_, the Little Descent, and the West
_Nohen-ial_, the Great Descent. The reason they give for this is that on
the east of this land a few people descended, and on the west a great
many; and with that syllable they understand little or much, to the east
and the west; and that few people came from one direction and many from
the other." Father Lizana goes on to express his opinion that the few
who came from the East were the Carthaginians, and the many from the
West were the Mexicans.

The very corrupt form in which he has given the words has led Señor
Eligio Ancona to suppose they belonged to the archaic and secret
language of the priests (_Historia de Yucatan_, Tomo I, p. 24), and Dr.
Carl Schultz-Sellack to imagine that they referred to East and West,
right and left, as he adopted the misreading _ɔiic_, left, for _ɔeɔ_,
little (_Die Amerikanischen Götter der Vier Weltgegenden_, in the
_Archiv für Ethnologie_, Band XI, 1879). But they are readily analyzed
when we have their correct orthography, as given above. The reference to
them in this place shows that the author of the chant was dealing with
the most ancient legends of his race.

The Itzas who resided in the Peten district left the region around
Chichen Itza some time in the fifteenth century, probably after the fall
of Mayapan. They were ruled by an hereditary chieftain, called by the
Spaniards "the great king, Canek." Under him the territory was divided
into four districts, each with its own chief, with whom the Canek
consulted about important undertakings.

Evidently in removing to Peten the Itzas were retracing their steps on
the line of their first entrance to the peninsula. They even attempted
to go further west, and guided, probably, by ancient memories, a large
number set out for Tabasco and the banks of the Usumaciuta,[TN-23] where
repose the ruins of Palenque, possibly the home of their ancestors. But
they were attacked and driven back by the natives of Tabasco, with the
loss of their leader, a brother-in-law of the great Canek. These and
other particulars about them are repeated by Villagutierre Sotomayor,
_Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de el Itza_, folio, Madrid,
1701.

4. The elliptical form of expression here renders the translation
difficult. The verb _cutal_ (old form _cultal_), pret. _culhi_ or
_cuthi_, fut. _culac_, means to sit down, to remain in a place, to be at
home there, to reside, etc. Perhaps the translation both here and in § 2
should be, "for thirteen katuns they ruled, etc."

5. The word _yum_, plural _yumob_, means father and also chief, leader,
ruler, etc. In modern Maya it is the translation of Sir, Mister, Señor.

The proper names of the localities whence the four divisions are said to
have come, have a mythological cast. I cannot find any of them in the
present geography of Yucatan. Kin Colah Peten is mentioned in a "katun
wheel" in this same Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel, as the name of one
of the towns which furnished a katun stone. Zuiva I have already
referred to as appearing in the Quetzalcoatl myth (see page 110).

The mountains of Canhek and the Nine Mountains take us to the Itzas
around Lake Peten, in the extreme south of the peninsula, this last
mentioned division being, in fact, that from the south.

6. _U payalob_, plural passive of _pay_, to call, to summon.

_Tan yol che_, _ol_ or _yol_ is the heart or centre of the leaf or
plant; _tan xuluc mul_, see page 174. _Yauat pixanobi_, they were happy
in singing, or, they gained favor by singing. The expression is obscure.
The verb _auat_ is applied to the singing of birds, the crowing of
cocks, and generally to the natural sound made by any animal, and, in
composition, to the sound of musical instruments, as, _auatzah_, to play
on the flute, to blow a trumpet.

7. _Uacchahi_ from _uacchahal_, appears to be a strongly figurative
expression. It is explained in Pio Perez' Dictionary, "salirse con
esfuerzo de su cubierta ó encaje, saltarse de ella _como tripa por el
ano_."

_Hauic_, from _haual_, to end, finish, cease to exist. Thus the
chronicler closes his recital, repeating the to him no doubt bitter fact
that the Maya nation and the Maya name had passed away.


FOOTNOTES:

[178-1] pachah u cah.

[178-2] oxlahunte.

[178-3] nohemel.

[178-4] ɔeɔemel.

[178-5] likul.

[178-6] hoki.

[178-7] uchci.




   THE CHRONICLE
         OF
  CHAC XULUB CHEN.

         BY
     NAKUK PECH.

        1562.




CHRONICLE OF CHICXULUB.


Among the ancient documents collected by Pio Perez was a series relating
to the town of Chicxulub, about six leagues north of Merida. They are
entitled _Documentos de Tierras de Chicxulub, 1542_. They consist of a
history of the town and of the conquest of the country, written by Nakuk
Pech, about 1562; a survey of the town lands by several members of the
Pech family, testified to Feb. 7, 1542; a partial list of the Spanish
conquerors; a portion of an account by another member of the Pech
family, and a further statement by Nakuk Pech.

The longest and the most interesting of these is the history of the
Conquest, or, as the writer calls it, "the history and the chronicle of
Chacxulubchen"--_u belil u kahlail Cħac Xulub Cħen_--this being one of
the native forms of the name of the town. It is headed "Conquest and
Map," but the map has disappeared. Usually such "maps" accompanying the
title papers of towns in Yucatan have as a central figure the outlines
of a church with the name of the town; around this is drawn the figure
of the town lands, with the names of the wells, trees, stones and other
landmarks mentioned in the titles.

The writer, Nakuk Pech, baptized Pablo Pech, must have been between
sixty and seventy years of age when he drew up his statement, inasmuch
as he mentions occurrences, as late as 1562, and also speaks of himself
as an adult in 1519. He belonged to a noble family, the Pechs of Cumkal,
who are mentioned by Sanchez Aguilar as hereditary _batabs_, or
independent chiefs. They appear to have given their names to the
province on the west coast called Kin Pech, or Campech, known to the
English as Campeachy, and to that of Ceh Pech, in which the city of Ho,
afterwards called Merida, was situated. The Abbe Brasséur,[TN-24] on very
slight grounds, surmised that they were not originally of Maya stock,
but probably descendants of the Caribs.[190-1]

He states that he was the son of Ak Kom Pech, in baptism Martin Pech,
and the grandson of Ah Tunal Pech, while the head of the house of Pech
seems to have been Ah Naum Pech, baptized Don Francisco de Montejo Pech.

Pech always uses as the name of his town _Chac Xulub Chen_, which means
"the well of the great horns," probably because some huge antlers were
found there, or were set up to mark the spot. The modern name _Chic
Xulub_ was probably applied to it as a parody, or a play on words. It
means to cuckold one, to put horns on him.[191-1]

A literal translation of the document was made by Don Manuel Encarnacion
Avila, of Merida, about 1860, and this has been of service to me in
completing the present rendering. But Señor Avila, though familiar with
the Maya of to-day, was evidently not at all acquainted with the ancient
terms with reference to the calendar, and the usages of the natives
before the Conquest. He therefore made serious errors wherever such
occurred.

Moreover, as it was his purpose to give an extremely literal
translation, he often sacrificed to this both clearness and correctness,
and in various passages his sentences are unintelligible.

The Abbé Brasseur (de Bourbourg) commenced to copy the original when in
Merida, but completed only the first two paragraphs. He applied for a
copy of the remainder; but by an error he received instead of this an
unfinished transcript of another paper by the Pech family. These
fragments he inserted, with a translation of his own, in the second
volume of the Reports of the _Mission Scientifique au Mexique et à
l'Amérique Centrale_, pp. 110-120 (4 to, Paris, Imprimerie Impériale:
1870). As his lexicographic resources were, by his own statement, quite
deficient (_id._, note to p. 116), he is scarcely to be criticised if,
as is the case, much of his translation but faintly presents the meaning
of the original.

It will be seen that I have sacrificed every attempt at elegance in the
English translation to an endeavor to preserve faithfully the style of
the original, even to its needless repetitions and awkward sentences.


TEXT.

_Concixta yetel Mapa._

1. U hotzuc ca culhi ah buluc ahau lai katun ca uli Españolesob ca
cahiob te ti noh cah te ti Ho; lae te ix ah bolon ahaue ti tun cahi
cristianoili; lae he hab yax ulci ca yum Españolesob uay ti lum lae tu
habil 1511 años.

       *       *       *       *       *

2. Ten cen yn Nakuk Pech yax hidalgos concixtadoren, uay ti lum lae tu
cacabil Maxtunil cin ɔabal ti yax cah tu cacabil cħacxulub Cħen. Bai bic
ɔaa nen in canante tumen in yumob Ah Naum Pech lic utzcinic utz olal u
belil u kahlail uay ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen in yax mekthantah lai cah
lae capel cacab Chichinica _y_ uay Cħaac Xulub Cħen.

3. Cen Nakuk Pech in kaba cuchi ti ma ococ haa tin pol cuchi u mehenen
Tahkom Pech D^on Martin Pech ti cah Xulkum Cheel; bai bic ɔaanoon canan
hol cacabob tumen in yum Ah Naum Pech likul tu cah Mutul ca tah
culcintaben in canante cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen lae ti manan to u manac u
talel ca yum Españolesob uay tac lumi Yucatan lae ten tun halach uinic
uai ti cah uai ti luum Cħac Xulub Cħen lae ca tun uli ca yum Sr.
Adelantado uai ti peten lae ichil yabil 1519 años cuchi lae ten ix yax
batab; ca uli Españolesob tu lumil uai Maxtunil lae toonix kame tu yabal
ɔaolalobe toonix yax ɔaic patan yetel ɔicil tiob _y_ ca ɔaic hanalob
tiob capitanob Españolesob; hek Adelantado u kabae lai uli uai Maxtunil
tu tancabal Nachi May; ti yanob ca binon cilob uchebal ca ɔaic
cicioltiob; mayto ococob ti cah cuchi chenbel zutucahob paibe uai ti
lume oxppel u ɔanlob uai tu cacabil Maxtunile uai tun likulob cu binelob
tu holpai ɔunul tu hol u payil Ɔilam tancoch yoxpel hab cahanobi.

4. Tiob yan cuchi ca bini u kubulte in yumob tiob; lai Adelantado u kaba
lai zutui uai ti lum; lae Ixkakuk u kaba u ɔa in yum tiob lai u kaba lai
xcħuplal u ɔah tiob menyahticob _y_ tzenticob tiob tan yan cuchi ca tal
katuntabilob tumen Cupulob ca tun lukobi ca biniob ti cahtalob ti Ecab
kantanenkin u kaba u lumil cahlahciob; tix yanob cuchi ca katuntabiob
tumen Ah Ecabob ca lukobie ca cuchob Cauaca ti tun ocobi te maniob ti
cah [194-1]Ɔekom ti u kaba cuhe manciob ca cuchiob ti cah TixcuumcuUuc u
kaba cah kuchciob ti liculob ca kuchoob Tinuum u kaba cah kuchciob caix
u tzaclahob u Chicħen Ytza u kaba ti tun u katahob u Rey cah u lahanobi
ca alab tiobi: "Yan ahau, yume," ci yalalob, "ye yan Ahau Cocom Aun Pech
Ahau Pech, Namox Cheel Ahau Cheel Ɔiɔan tun; Katun ɔul, te xebnae," ci
yalalob tumen [195-1]naob Bon Cupul; u lukulob tu Chicħeen Ytza lae
catun cuchiob yicnal Ahau Ixcuat Cocom te Akee: "Yume, matab a binelex
te lae; bin zatacex," cibin yalablob tumen Ahau Ixcuat Cocom ca
ualkahiob tutulpachob, ca binob ca cuchob Cauaca tu caaten, caix kuchob
tu holpayal Catzim u kaba tix nakob ti kankabe, ca biniob ti cahtalob
tuyulpachob tet Ɔelebnae u kabae lai yax cahicob ca ulob uai ti luum
lae.

5. Lai ye tan Chanpatune uacppel hab cahanobi caix u hokzahubaob te
Campeche; lai Adelantado u kaba yax ɔule lai mani uai ti lum; lae tiob
tun yan Campech cuchi ca u katahob patan caix u yabi u thanob tumen
batabob tu cahalcahobe tulacal bini patan; tiob te maaniob ti kaknabe
yahpulul patanob; lae ca tun binen _y_ in lakob Ah MaCamPech _y_ u yit
ɔin Ixkil Ytzam Pech in yahaulil cah Cumkale _y_ in yum yan ti cah
Xulcum Cheele; lai in lakob cat binen tu pach patan, laix ca yilahob,
laix ca alak Nachi May, yoklal yohel maa yohel ma u thanob yoklal u yax
ulob ichil yotoch, ca uliob lae laitah oklal u thanahob u lakintob, ca
binob tu pach patan yoklal yettail tahiob Españolesob ti tun kubiob
tumenel capitanobe; tiix c [196-1]matanok zayo _y_ capote _y_ zapato _y_
u _y_ ppoc cicialtabion tumen te capitanob; caix lukon ca ɔoci ca
ɔaic zililob Españolesob yan tacix ca buc ca ulon lay zayo _y_ capote,
lay Ixkil Ytzam Pech yan Conkale laix ca lakah Macan Pech yan Yaxkukule
_y_ in yum Ahkom Pech u noxibal ca binon.

6. Cen ix Nakuk Pech lae in kaba ten yax batab yax kubob patan ca binon
Campech ca kubob patan, caix uloon tutul pache tamuk u talel Españolesob
tu bel Campech talel u cahob ti cahtal Ich can zi hoo ti nohcah ti Hoe;
tuchi ix ca yubah u talelob Españolesob tu bel Campech, ca binon ca ɔab
ziltiob tolo ten caix binon tu caaten cat kube patan. Cen ix Nakuk Pech
uai tu cabil Cħac Xulub Chen _y_ Ah Macan Pech yan tu cabil Yax Kukul
_y_ Ixkil Ytzam Pech u noh batabil Conkale _y_ ten cen Ixnakuk Pech
batab uai ti cah Cħac Xulub Cħen teix oci ca ziltiob tucaaten te
Ɔibkale[196-2] ix u chucan u nahubaob tucaaten ca kube ziltiob u lum y
cab y u cħahucil hanalob u kamciob te Ɔibilkale ti tamuk u talel yocolob
ti cahtal ti Hoo lay D^n Fran^co de Montejo, yax capitan General yax uli
uai tu peten ti Hoo lae _y_ D^n Fran^co de Bracamonte y Fran^co Tamayo
_y_ Juan de Pacheco _y_ Perarberes lai capitanesob uliob ichil habil
1541 años.

7. Lai hab ca uliob ti Hoo ti cahtalob lay capitanob mektanmail
Españolesob, ca uliob ti Ho lae tenili batab cen Ix Nakuk Pech, ca uli
Españolesob te ti Hooe tenix kubi patan ti concixtadoresob ti Hoo, tenix
batab uai ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen lae tamuk u escribanoil Roderigo
Alvares ichil yabil 1542 años.

8. U tan u toxol cahob ti concixtadoresob tumen capitanob adelantado lay
yax Españolesob _y_ escribano Roderigo Alvares lai ɔibtic u xocaan
patanob ti yulel hun huntzuc ti cahob, baix tamuk u kubic patan in lakob
tulacal lai in cħibalob lae ti tamuk ban patane yoklal toxbil patan tiob
Españolesob tumen capitanob adelantado _y_ escribano Rodrigo Alvarez
ichil hun hunteel hab uli Españolesob ti Hoo; tulacal ca ix cħaben cen
Ix Nakuk Pech ca ɔaben ti Don Julian Doncel encomendero lai u yax yumil
cah uay Cħaac Xulub Cħen lae lai yax encomendero, caix machi in kab _y_
tu tan capitan Don Fran^co de Montejo adelantado ten tun ɔabi ti batabil
ti D^n Julian Donsel tu kab, ca hoppi in tan lic u patan u yumil kul
uinicilob.

9. Cen Ix Nakuk Pech lae ten tan lic in batabil cuchi ca uli Albares yax
alcalde mayor uai tu petenil Yucatan ti Hoo lae, caix uli Alvara de
Carvayor alcalde Mayor, li xan caix uli Oidor D^n Tomas Lopez tenili
batab cuchie heix in kabatah cen ix Nakuk Pech ca oci ha tin pole _y_ ca
tin kama bautismo D^n Pablo Pech lay in kaba ca hau[198-1] in kabatic
Nakuk Pechil; hidalgoson yax batabon tumen capitanob cat yax chuca uai
ti peten lae ton ix yax kubob patan ti ɔulob cat ɔab u chucil toon tumen
Dios _y_ Rey ahtepal; lae ton u cħibalon hidalgos tu yalomal in mehenob
tulacal tu tan kinil cu binel tu nak u hayalcab; lae ton batabon
yahaubiI[TN-25] uai ti luum ti ma yanac Santa Yglesiaob ti cacabob, tan
to u ximbal tabal lumob tumen Españolesob uatub ci tan u moltalob utial
u kulteob ti yoklal piz uinicob cuchi ti ma christianacobi tulacal in
mektan cahil uinicob tumen in kamci in Cristianoil, cen Nakuk Pech cuchi
laili batab en cuchi ca in kamah Santo Oleos _y_ Santo ocolal, utial in
camzic in mektan cahilob tulacal tenix yax mache vara utial justiciail,
tumen t binen in nant u than Dios _y_ ca noh Ahau Rey Ahtepal; laitun ca
yum ti Oidor D^n Tomas Lopes ca uchi lae yax ɔai u xicin patan ti
batabob ti cahal cahob; lai temes ti ca yatan ɔooctun yahaubil Oidor D^n
Tomas Lopes ca tun tin kubah in bara ti in mehen D^n Pedro Pech ichil
habil 152 a^s.

10. Lai cu xocol yabil cuchi lae ca in kamah u bara in yum Nakuk Pech
D^n Pablo Pech Ursula Pech ixan uai ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen, lae utial
in meyactic Dios _y_ ca noh ahau Rey ahtepal utial in mektantic lai cah
lae uai ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen lae.

11. La tun ulicob tu cahalob yetel u yahkulelob _y_ u holpopob bay tu
cahal Yaxkukul, bay tu cahal Xulkum Cheel, bai tu cahal Maxtunil
yaxcħibal Macan Pech yaxcħibal Tahkom Pech Xulkum Cheel, yet ulcob ix
yahkinob yaxcħibal Macan Pech yaxcħibal Tahkom Pech Xulkum Cheel, yet
ulcobix u cuchulob tu pachob, ca uliob uai ti cahtale yet ulcobix
yahkinob u holpopob _y_ yahkulelob tu pachob u halach uinicob, ca uliob
tu cacabil Yaxkukul baix toon xan cat uloon uai tu cacabil Cħac Xulub
Cħen lae, ca cahiob uai lae lai culcinaben Tah Nakuk Pech, tumen in yum
Tah Koon Pech u mehen Tah Tunal Pech yaxcħibal Maxtunile mektantic cah.

12. Lae cat uli ɔulob uai tu lumil cacabob lae manan Maya uinicob ti
kuchi yolob u kube patan ti yax ɔulob cuchi, lae lai u yax cantahob
ɔulob Españolesob ɔocan ili tun u ɔabal cah canante. Cen tah Nakuk Pech
in yax kamici cah uai ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen, ca uliob u chun u thanob
tu pachob _y_ yahkulel _y_ u holpopob _y_ yahkinob lae, lai u kaba Ah
Kul Matu _y_ Kulche _y_ ulcob ix yax kinob Ahkin Cocom Ahkin Tacu _y_
ulcob ix u holpop Nachan Cen _y_ holpop Xuluc, lai u kaba, holpop lai
mektanmailob ca ulob uai tii u lum Maxtunil _y_ Ah Kul Chuc _y_ u holpop
tu pachob; lai u heɔahob u cacabil uai Cħac Xulub Cħen caix uliob u
holcanob u nacomob, nacom Kan, nacom Xuluc, nacom Pot, nacom May, nacom
Ek, lai u kaba nacomob, layobi u kab nacomob yah mektanul batab tah
Nakuk Pech ca ulen uai ti cah Cħac Xulub Cħen; lai chiccunic yol lai in
cu uchulob cat ulen uai ti cahtah uai ti luum uai tu cacabil Cħac Xulub
Cħen.

13. Cen tah Nakuk Pech lae ca ulen tumen u halach uinic tenob ca chichi
cah uai ti Cħac Xulub Cħen; lae tumen u nucteelob cuchi lae manan u
manak u talel Españolesob uai ti luum, lae minan u yana cah chicunic cah
uai Cħac Xulub Cħen; lai yobi t ubahilob lae ti xocan ili, yulel
Españolesob ti noh cah ti Ho, _y_ u kamal cristianoil tumen uinicob uai
Tah Ceh Peche ɔocan ili ix in molic cah uai tulacahal Cħac Xulub Cħen,
cen D^n Pablo Pech _y_ in yum D^n Martin Pech, conquixtador, Xulkum
Cheel.

14. Lae ti tum lae ti hoppi u licil u katun Españolesob ich mul
cochleah[201-1] ca binon, _y_ in yum Ah Macan Pech yaxcħibal Yaxkukul, y
Yxkil Yɔam Pech yaxcħibal Cumkal, _y_ ti binen tu pach katun; ca oci u
patan kooch uahobe lai tun mektanmai u yumil kul uiniclob cah, ca ti
binon ti katun yah, yukul kah _y_ tuce tumenel u kuxilob ti kul uinicob;
ichil uacpe u yanonie _y_ in lakob tu pach kul uinicob ti numia;
mektanan tun in yum tumen u chunthanob, lay yobi hach ilaob yuchul
tulacal tu banalob tin cantah ichil in informacion tulacal lae uchebal
yoheltabal tumen in cħibalob in mehenob tin pach ti uchen cimic uai
okolcab[201-2] lae yoklal in titulo in probanza ɔaan ten tumen ca yumil
ti Dios _y_ ca noh Ahau Rey ahtepal; manan in patan maix uchac in botic
patan maix in mehenob maix in u ixmehenob bin u bote patan yoklal tu
lukzah ten ca yumil ti Dios ichil u zahacil in puczical; ti mato in
uilal u uich Españolesob cuchi tu ɔahten ich ich olal utial in kubic
inba tu kab Españolesob _y_ in cahalob tulacal utial u cahal cahob
tumenel capitanob Adelantado yax concixtadoresob; uliob uai ti u lumil
Yucatane; he hab yax ulci ɔulob tu lumil uai ti Cupule lae 1511 años.

15. Cuchi mahun ilabac ɔulob Españolesob ca chuci Jeronimo de Aguilar
tumenob a Cusamilob; lai lae u chun yohelabal peten tulacal lae yoklal
ɔoci u xinbaltabal uchi lumob tulacal, lai tah oklal ma talan uchi lumob
peten tulacal lai tun cin ɔolic[202-1] tu tan Ahau ca tu cuchi tu tan
Ahau Ah Macan Pech D^n Pedro Pech _y_ u cuchteelob yax cħibalob u
nacomob tu pachob tulacal binob tu pach yoklal utzilob Ahau ylal u
uichob u maseual uinicob; caix tu te ta lahun cakal u nucil uinicob u
bines tu pach ti Ahau Rey ahtepal u tzicob ti messa nachi ti España,
heix mac xenahi[202-2] tu tzicile tu tan Rey ahtepale; lai tun tu yala
Ahau ca u bote patanob tulacal, yal u mehenob tulacal, heix ton Ah
Pechob yaxcħibal uai ti lum _y_ yaxcħibal tal ti Cupul, ca bin tu yalah
yabil peten _y_ yabil maya uinicob u bal lum, caix bin tu tzolah u xocan
tu tanil ca noh Ahau ca uɔac[202-3] u talel heɔbil u chi lum u Chinante
Ahau; bay tun chacanhic ca lumil lae lai Aguilar, lae te hantabi tumen
ah Naum Ah Pot Cusamile tu yabil 1517 años; lai yabil hauic cħa katun,
lae lai hauic u uacuntabal u tunil balcah, yoklal hunhunkal tun u talel
uaatal u tunil balcah cuchi ti man uluc ɔul Españolesobe Cusamil cuchi
uaital petenil; tumen ulic Españolesob ca t haui u betabal.

16. 1519 años lai yabil yax ulcob Españolesob uai Cusamil tu yox mal,
Fernando de Cortes _y_ Espoblaco Lara. A 28 de Febrero cuchi ca uliob
Cusamilob u yax mal ahohelilob hahal u cibel than. Lai yabil cuchcob tu
Chicħen tah mak opile ti tun yax oheltabi u Chicħeen Ytza tumen noh
Españolesob D^n Fran^co de Montejo Adelantado, u halach uinicob ca ɔanob
tu Chicħen Ytza.

17. 1521 años tu yoxlahunpiz u kinil agosto chucic u lumil Mexico tumen
Españolesob; uchci u yox katun tabalob[203-1] Españolesob tumen cah
tulacal uai tu cahal Cupule; cauthi katahob Ah Ceh Pech tu cimil Zalibna
_y_ etahau Lenpot Tixkocħoh tu provinciail Ticanto _y_ yicnal ah
Kinichkakmo Ytzmal u nup u than holtun Ake; lai yabil lae uchic u kuchul
Españolesob tu Chicħeen Ytza tu caten u heɔob u Chicħen Ytza, ti ca uli
Capitan D^n Fran^co de Montejo yahtohil yahtochil Naocom Cupul kuchal u
cah. Hunkal hab yax kuchcob tu Chicħen Ytza ti u kabahob ah makopilobe
ah ɔuɔopob.

18. 1542 años lai hab ca u heɔahob lum Espanolesob ti Hich can Ziho
chuncan u nup u than Kinich Kakmo ahkin _y_ Ahtutul Xiu yahaulil
cabecera Mani u pol u meta u heɔahob yaxcħibalob, lai yax hoppic yocol
patan tiob lae tu yoxten tun yulelob ta lumil, ca tun hunkul culhob, lae
heklai culicob; helelae u hunten, ulcobe tu Chicħen Ytzae ti u yax
makahob oop, matech u makal lai oop, ca u makahop Espanolesob u kabatcob
ahmakoopilob; u caten ulcobi tu Chicħene ca [204-1]u tocahob naobon
Cupul; tu yoxten yulelobe ca tun hunkul culhiob lae lai yabil lae 1542
años lai tun hunkul culhiob uai ti lum Ychcanzi hoo--yanilob, helelae
oxlahun Kan ahcuchhab ti Maya xoclae.

19. 1543 anos lai yabil binci Españolesob tet xaman Cheile u xachete
Mayab uinicob u maseualtobe yoklal manan maseual uinic u palilob ti Ho;
lai talob ti xache uinicob u maseualtob tu chi tun, ca kuchob ti Popce
ti uch ban patan tiobi likulob ti Ho, cat kuchob ti Popce tu chi, ca
ulob ca biniob Tikom, man ti kin yanhicobe te Tixkome ti humkal u kinil
yanob ca lukabi lai Españolesob.

20. Lae 1544 años lai hab ca ɔan ɔul Cauaca Asiesa u capitanil, ca
ɔanoob te Cauacae ti u chi pach yumili [204-2]ti oki patan tiobi cab
ulum ixim ɔabtiob tiob yan Cauacae, catun ca tu kalahob ti mascab ahkul
Caamal tal Sisal ca tu kata u xocal cah tulacal, hun hab tialan ti
mazcab tumenob, lai paye u bel Españolesob ca taliob ti cahtal Sachi,
heclai Ahkul Kamal lae lai oci ti batabil Saci Sisale D^n Juan Caamal de
la Cruz u kabatah yoklal hach hahal u than, lai yax utzcit Cruz Cauacae,
u yabi u than tumen ɔulob, lae lai tumen lai ti oci ti batabil Sisal,
ontkin ac u batabil cat cimil; lai ti pay u bel Españolesob ca binob ti
katun yah Tixkochnah; xane he ɔulob lae hunppel hab ɔananob Cauaca,
lukob cat talob Saci hunkul hi u kal uinicob ti mazcab yilab batab
Caamal.

21. Lae 1545 años ɔani ɔulob Saci laix yabil hopp ti cristianoil tumen
padresob orden de San Fran^co, te tu holhaa Champotone hali yax ulcob
padresob u machmaob cahlohil ti Jehucristo tu kabob lai lic yezic ti
maseual uinicob, cat yax ulob tu tu holhaa Chanpoton, lae te chikin uai
tu cuchcabal u than uai Ichcansihoo, ti Hoo tu cahal Ichcansihoo lai u
kaba; lai padresob hoppez Cristianoil uai ti cah peten Yucatan lae lai u
kabaobe Fr. Juan de la Puerta _y_ Fr. Luis de Villarpando _y_ Fr. Diego
de Becal _y_ Fr. Juan de Guerrero y Fr. Merchol de Benavente layob
hoppes Cristianoil uai ti peten chikin lae ti mato tac Cristianoil uai
Cupul; pachal hom to tac Cristianoil, baito bin cantic, ca bin hoppoc
toon uai ti Cupule.

22. 1546 años, lai hab ca uchi ahetzil[206-1] lae altose la tierra: 9 de
Noviembre bol ulo de pasen 4 meses ca uchi tu bolonpis u kinil noviembre
ti yabil de 1546 años canppel u cinanil katun; lae ca zihi lae kuchi
hunppel hab yalcab uinicob; ca tali u molicubaob tu caten ocol u cibal
patan, ca zihi katune ulel u cibahob ahezobob tali chikin tabsic uinicob
ca yutzcinah katun lae Etz Cunul _y_ Ah Camal talob chikin he ɔul
cimsabiobe catul mehen ɔulob u camzah palil Mena ti cimob Chamaxe,
ppatal u cibahob; ca talob Saci tohyol tulacal ɔulob ca liki katun
yokolob lae[206-2] tihi t tun u cimsabal; Ah Etz Camal Tipakan Ah Pakam
tu cimilhi Surusano yokol Nicte; tumen u cahalobe hunppel akab hi u
cimil ɔul tumen uinicob lae kohan yooc _y_ u kaboob, ca bini tu kinil
katun ti akab ti cah tulacal.

23. 1547 años lai hab ca paxi u chem Exboxe Ecabe; ca bini Espanolesob
bakzahticob u ɔahob katun yok Boxte Ecabe ual Ekboxil.

24. Lae 1548 años ulci padre Emitanyo Saci chumes[206-3] Cristianoil.

25. Lae 1550 años mol ci cah tulacal tabal tal Manii.

26. 1551 años ulci padre Guadian Fr. Fernando Guererro Saci Sisal lai
oces haa tu hol uinicob lai chunbezob cristianoil uay tu cuch cabal Saci
tulacal, tal chikin Cheel, tali Ecab, tali Cusamil, tali ti xaman, tali
ti nohol, xan lai chunmes[207-1] u pakal monisterio Saci Sisal.

27. Lae 1552 años lai hab cahciob padresob yokab cuchi; lai yabil ulcob
ah canbesah _y_ kayob uai Zisale, talob chikin laobi canbez u kayob
missa y bisperas ti canto de organo _y_ chul y cantolano ti hunkul ma
ohelon uai cuchi.

Lae 1553 años lai hab ca uli Oidor D. Tomas Lopes uai tal lumil Yucatan
lae tali Castella ca uli tu [207-2]chibil tumen ca noh ahau Rey ahtepal
de Castilla u yanton tu kab Españolesob uaye, lai haues ca tocabal tumen
Españolesob, laix haues u chi on pek, laix ti chunmes u yanhal batabob
ti cahal cah, ca tu ɔa u barail, laix ti ɔai u takail patan xan oxppel u
yocol patan ti Españolesob yub te cib uluum ixim cħoyche y sulbiltab _y_
yic, buul, yib cuum, xamach, ppuul, ca muc yoklal patan ta c yumil ɔulil
c beta ti matac oidor ɔaic u nucul bahunbal; lai uchci u cħabal kul
chuuc tumen AhMacan Pech ca lukon Sisal yoklal u katci ah chucil
kulchuc, lae tumen lai toci u chucil Ah Ceh Pech uay Cupul, lae lai
talic uai tu pach Ah kin Pech Macan Pech u palil Ahmacan Pech yetel u
nacomob ti cab Yaxkukul lae.

28. De 1519 años lai hab ca uli Españolesob uai tac cahal Con ah Ytza
uai ti lum Yucatan, lae lai cin chicilbesah u kinil, yuil _y_ yabil yan
canal, Cen D^n Pablo Pech, u mehen en D^n Martin Pech, ti Xulcum Cheel,
concixtadoren, uai lae Maxtunil yetel Cħac Xulub Cħen, tal kamah ix
ɔulob tu uolol ca puczikal, maix ca ɔaab katun yah tiob laob lae D^n
Juan de Montejo Adelantado y u chayanil capitanob bay yanil u kabaob ti
libro; ton ix yax kamah Cristianoil concixtadores D^n Martin Pech u
mehen D^n Fernando Pech, D^n Pablo Pech u mehen en D^n Martin Pech, hel
tu yoxlahunpis u kinil u de Octubre de 1518, ocic ha tu holob in mektan
cahilob ti hunmolhob Maxtunile, ti ocol ha tu polob tumen yax obispo D^n
Fran^co Toral ti Maya uinicob; ca [208-1]oha tu polob men ca yum obispo
lae cat [208-2]es sabi u uinbail santo tiob cahob tulacal u uinbail S.
Pedro _y_ S. Pablo y S. Juan, y S. Luis _y_ S. Antonio _y_ S. Miguel _y_
S. Francisco _y_ S. Alonso y S. Agustin y S. Sebastian y S. Diego, ca u
[208-3]ɔibotahob oleos ca u kabatah P^o yan cħa oleos.

29. Lay u kahlail tulacal lae tin hun molcinzah uay ti librose uchebal u
nuctic uba uinicob himac bin oltic yohelto u ɔoc lukanil yanomal ca noh
ahau Dios uchac tumen tusinile.--U patanil hibic ulci Españolesob uay
tac lumil lae tumen u yolat ca yumil ti Dios ahtepal uay ti peten; lae
baix u than ca yum Señor D^n Juan de Montejo y D. Fran^co de Monte lay
yax ulob uai tac lumil lae laix tu ɔah u thanil u cumtal iglesia ti
ɔucenɔucil cahob u hol cababob y yotoch cah u kuna ca yum noh ahau bay u
cah mensone u yotoch ah na mulbeobe[209-1].

30. Bay xan cu yalic ca noh yum Ah Naum Pech D^n Fran^co de Montejo Pech
y D^n Juan Pech lai u kabaob ca oci haa tu holob tumen padresob y
adelantado lay capitan hi layob ulob uai ti lume Yocolpeten, hek lai
kabanzabi ti Yucatanil tumen ca yax yumob Españolesob lae baix bin u
patcantic ca yum Españolesob, hebic u beltahob, caxtu yalah binil hunkul
cuxlacon tumen Dios, caix ti yubah Maya uinicob heklay u kabaob lae, ca
tu yalah Naum Pech ti u mektan cahil ti ɔuɔucencil:--"Oheltex, talel
u cah hunabku, ti peten heklai hahal Diose, u chicul hahal Dios; binex
cuxlac, ca cici kamex, ma a ɔaicex katun yokolob ca pas ma u hanalob
_y_ yukalob ixim, cax, uluum, cab, buul u hanalob yoklal [210-1]u colcah
ti Cristianoil lai u palil ton Dios;" bay tun cibahob mamac ɔai katun
caix tu likzahubaob ca bin u yan teob Españolesob tu concixtob tu yet
xinbal tahob ɔulob.

31. Bay xan he Nachi Cocom ti cahan tu holcacab Sutuytae tu chuccabal
Chicħen Ytzae heklay kabansabi Chicħen Ytzaile he Ah Cohuot Cocome tu
yantah u than Dios _y_ ca noh ahau tu luksah u [210-2]ponob u
banderasob, utia ca noh ahau utial conquixta _y_ adelantado _y_ yum
padre clerigo tu cuch cahil xan maix u ɔa yah katun u lukzahubaob
ichilob kaxahob kunal _y_ yotoch cah tu cuchteelob.

32. Hex Naɔi Mabun Chane culhi tu ca cabil u natatah bicil talel u cah
hunkul cuxtal yoltah u kububaob ti Dios tu hahil Ah Catzimob _y_
AhChulimob tu chuccabil Manil, _y_ Ah Tutul Yiu hex uay ti lakin Chel
_y_ Tan Cupulob hex ti Campeche Naɔacab Canul; bay ɔa lukanhi u tan
hahil Dios uay ti peten uay tu lumil Sacuholpatal Sacmutix tun, Ah
Mutule, Tunal Pech culhi uay ti cah lae.

33. He Ah Naum Peche uay u payahe mehenob caix ti yalah:--"Oheltex, hun
ynix u kaba kin ahbalcab bin uluk ahlikin cabob hun mexob Ahpul tu
chicul hunabku ti peten ca xicex ti kam bu hahil asilex[211-1]:" bay tan
binciob tu xinbalob yalan che yalan haban, ca kuchiob tu tancabal
Naɔaycab Canule Campech, ca yalahob:--"Hele tac u yulel a uula, Ah
Naɔacab Canule, caxti kam tuzebal la umen;" yalab lae ca tipp u chemob
tu hol u kaknabil Campech, caix ti [211-2]yalahob ca yumtah banderasob
sasacpon, ca ulon pixtahob Adelantado caix katabitiob tumen lai
Cristianoob Adelantado uatub ocahalob ichil Castellano than, matan u
natob ca uchen nucahob than:--"matan c ubah than;" ci u thanob caix
alabi Yucatanilob uay tu lumil cutz tu lumil ceh.

34. Bay tun binciob capitanesob _y_ ca yum Adelantado D^n Fran^co de
Montejo lay tu beltah u yabal ppis _y_ kuuch utial muse utial bucoh
ɔimin[211-3] tumen binel u cibahob tu cahal Manii yicnal Ahtutul Xiu: ca
kuchob Yiba caniob Yibae, kuchob Nohcacab likul tal Becal, bay tun
manciob Españolesob ca kuchob Mani yicnal Tutul Xiu caix ti uacuntabic
nacon Ikeb nacon Caixicum nacon Chuc lay bin xic u paye Ah Cuat Cocom;
lay tun u chun u culcintabal [211-4]ahactan ob tumen u cuchulob ca
lukzabi u uichob yalan nohoch [211-5]yacatun sa bin tal pulbil huntul
lay ma lukzabi u uich ti yacatun sabin, luksabi u uich ca ɔa be ti ca
bin nacpalancal ti yicnal Adelantado Manii, caix ualkahi yah pululob tu
cahal Cuuat Cocom; catun liki Ah Naum Pech _y_ tu catulilob xic u talez
Ah Cuat Cocom; cu kuchulob, ca yalah ti Naun Pech bicil ma yilahi maix
yabahi ca yalah bicil ti binan tu Chicħen Ytzae tuzebal tal ci tu cail
tumen Ahpechob, ca kuchob Manil kube u cħasahob tusebal u yalci Ah Cocom
ma yilah bal uch tu cahal caix ɔab u chucil ti cabin u chucob mac u
beltahlobe.

35. Baix tun tal ci Ahpech tu cahalob yila u mektan cahilob uinicilobe
baytun talciob hex cat tal ɔulob tumen bin uchci u cimsabal ɔuul ti cah
tumen u cuchulob, catun manobca biniob yicnal Ah Batun Pech Cay Chel,
lay tun yilahobe ca manob ca binob Maxtunil yicnal Machi May _y_ tun Ah
Macan Pech; bai tun ualkahciob tu lumilob tu mektan cahilob tu
Yaxkukule; lai D^n Pablo Pech Ah Macan Cam Pech tumenel halach uinic lai
mektanmail tulacal lai uay ti chi kin lae yoklal maix u lukul yol
nacomob, tulacal bayxan lay tumen culcinaben in canant lay cacab Cħac
Xubub Cħen lae tumenel maseneal uinicob lae tan u [212-1]sa uinolabob
lai tumen [212-2]chic u nakci u yolah Dios ti cahob.

36. Lae hex lay ytoria lae tulacal tux manel S^r Españolesob _y_
kubabaob yax padresob, _y_ u kaba yax ɔulob bin ɔoloc[213-1] tumen lai u
ɔilibal, lae yoklal mentahan utial yoheltabal bic uchic concixta, uabic
numya tu mansahob uay yalan chee yalan aak yalan haban, ichil lay hab
lae _y_ u cha yan yax uinicob mehentzilob hancabob yoklal manal cappel
oxppel hab cahanob ta muktun u ɔablahal cahob tumen ca yumil ɔulilob,
lae ta muktun u ppizil cahob u ppizil u kaxilob cahob tumen Oidor Tomas
Lopes yan sedula tu kabob tumen ca noh Ahau utial tun xotlahal kaxob ti
mac cu cahtalob, ti ma yanac cahob cuchi tumen te zihnalon be nae
tulacalob, ti cu halach uinicil Naum Pech cuchi, ti ma uluc ɔulob heɔic
Cristianoil uay ti lum cuchi, he tun cat kuchi u kinil u yulah uay ti
peten, lae cat ul ɔulob uai ti lum Yucatan lae, ca binon kameob tumen u
zahacil ca puczikal, cat ɔoci Cristianoil uay ti lum lae cat ɔablahon
canante cacabob, ti ma yanac S^a Yglesia cuchi, cat hau u cahil lay bena
lae ma cah.

37. Helelae lay u chun in patcantic hen cex bin uchic u yuchul concixta
bahun numya t mansah _y_ S^r Españolesob yoklal maya uinicob cuchi
matan yolte ukuubaob ti Dios, ten tun cen D. Pablo Pech tin tzolah u
xicinob ti cacab Maxtunil.

38. Bay tan matan culhani catun emon ti cacab Cħac Xulub Cħen, ɔoci tun
u Cumtal S^a iglesia, lae ca tun ppisah ca ppisbi tu ɔutpach cahlahbal
yanumal in mehenob u chen cimic yokolcab, tumen ma u macan tu
baltiob[214-1] tumen Maya uinicob, ma u manbal cuntabalob u cħinal hen
cex bax tu ɔahton ca yumil ti Dios tumen u zahacil puczikale, lay tumen
ɔab u chucil ton tumen ca noh ahau Rey Ahtepal _y_ catun cumcintah S^a
iglesia utial kultic ca yumil ti Dios _y_ yotoch cah tu lakin iglesia u
kuna ca noh Ahau yetel meson.

39. Bay xan licix in betic in uotoch pakil na tu xaman iglesia; ma u
yalic Maya uinicob ua utialtob tu kinil, lay tumen ci chicilbezic hebix
in mentah mailobe _y_ yum D^n Pablo Pech Ah Macan Pech, y in yum D^n
Martin Pech Ah kom Pech, _y_ in yum D^n Ambrosio Pech Op Pech ix u
Maya kaba y Yxkil Ytzam Pech y D^n Estevan Pech Ahkulul Pech.

40. Tac kamah u noh comisionil u ppiz kaxob, tu ɔah u licenciail ca noh
Ahau Rey ahtepal ti ca yumil yax Oidor Tomas Lopes utial ca u ɔa nucte u
than ton utial ca ppizic u pach ca tocoynail he tux cahantacob uay uay
tu pach cahal utial ca utzac oheltic tux cu manel u ppizil ca luumil
utial kilacabob utial u tzenticubaob u ɔaic u hanalob ca encomenderosob,
lay oklal cin ɔaic u juramentoil tu tanil tulacal uinicob lay
informacion lae u hahil cu yilicob u tocoynailob tu xma yocol u yanal
tocoynail, lay oklal ɔaic u hahil.

41. Heix macx yax encomendero uay ti cacab Cħaac Xulub Cħen lae D^n
Julian Donsel encomendero hi uay ti cacah lae ca tu yalah ti batab
caxicob u ɔabob u chicul chi kax u luumob uay tu pach u mektan cahil;
yoklal tan u ppizil u chi lumob u chi kaxob ti lakin, ti nohol, ti
chikin, tulacal hen cex max cu cahtalob, tumen ɔoctun u heɔel
Cristianoil uay ti lume Cħaac Xulub Cħeen, _y_ lix cacilech u yum
Santiago patron ah canan cah utial D^n Pablo Pech.


CONQUEST AND MAP.

1. The fifth division of the 11th Ahau Katun was placed when the
Spaniards arrived and settled the city of Merida; it was during the 9th
Ahau that Christianity was introduced; the year in which first came our
lords the Spaniards here to this land was the

year 1511.

2. I, who am Nakuk Pech, of the first hidalgos conquistadores here in
this land in the district Maxtunil, I am placed in the first town in the
district Chac Xulub Chen. As thus it is given me to guard by my lord Ah
Naum Pech, I wish to compose carefully the history and chronicle of the
district of Chac Xulub Chen here, my first command, the town having two
districts, Chichinica and, here, Chac Xulub Chen.

3. My name was Nakuk Pech before I was baptized, son of Ah Kom Pech, Don
Martin Pech, of the town of Xul Kum Chel; thus we were given the
districts to guard by our lord Ah Naum Pech from the town Mutul, and I
was promoted to guard the district Chac Xulub Chen; when our lords, the
Spaniards, did not pass nor come here to this land Yucatan, I was then
governor here in this town, here in this land, Chac Xulub Chen. When our
lord, the Señor Adelantado came here to this province in the year 1519,
I was head chief; when the Spaniards came here to the land of Maxtunil
we received them with loving attention; we also first gave them tribute
and respect, and then we gave to eat to the Spanish captains; he who was
called Adelantado came here to Maxtunil to the dwelling of Nachi May;
then we went to see that they should be given pleasures; they did not
even enter the towns, not even visited the towns; they were here in this
land for three months, being placed here in the district of Maxtunil;
then they departed and went to begin a seaport, the seaport Ɔilam, and
remained there three years and a half.

4. They were there when my father went to make delivery to them; he
called the Adelantado returned here to this land; the maid servant named
Ixkakuk was presented to them by my father to give them food and wait
upon them; and they were there when they were attacked by the Cupuls;
and they departed, and went to live at Ecab Kantanenkin, as is called
the land where they settled; they were there when they were attacked by
those of Ecab, and they departed and arrived at Cauaca, which they
entered, and passed to the town Ɔekom, as the town is called; they
passed it and arrived at the town Tixcuumcuuc, so-called; and they
departed from there and arrived at the town called Tinuum; and then they
all set out in search of Chichen Itza, so-called; there they asked the
King of the town to meet them, and the people said to them; "There is a
King, O Lord," they said, "there is a King, Cocom Aun Pech, King Pech,
Namox Chel, King Chel, of Ɔiɔantun; foreign warrior, rest in these
houses," they said to them, by the Captain Cupul. They departed from
Chichen Itza and arrived with King Ixcuat Cocom of Ake; "Lords, you
cannot go, you will lose yourselves," was said to them by the King
Ixcuat Cocom, and they turned back again, and went and arrived at Cauaca
for the second time, and they reached the seaport called Catzun, where
they marched by the sea, and went and returned to Ɔelebnae, as it is
called, where they first settled when they first came to this land.

5. They remained in Chanpatun six years, when they went forth to
Campeche; he, called the Adelantado, the first Spaniard, passed here to
this land; they were at Campeche when they asked tribute; according to
orders by the chiefs to all the villages there was tribute. They passed
on by the sea (asking) for tribute to be brought to them. Then I went
with my companions Ah Macan Pech and his younger brother Ixkil Ytzam
Pech, the king of the town Cumkal, and my father, who was in the town
Xulcumcheel; these were my companions when I went back for the tribute;
they saw it; also Nachi May accompanied us, because he knew that he (the
Adelantado), did not know the language; because they first stayed at his
house when they came, and for this reason they spoke to him to accompany
them when they went after the tribute, because he was a friend to the
Spaniards when it (the tribute) was delivered to the captains; from them
we received coats and cloaks and shoes and rosaries and hats, and had
much pleasure from the captains; we left when the Spaniards had ended
giving these gifts; already we had our clothes when we arrived, the
coats and cloaks (we) Ixkil Ytzam Pech of Conkal, our companions Ah
Macan Pech of YaxKukul, and my father Ah Kom Pech, who were the greatest
of us.

6. And I Nakuk Pech by name was head chief when they first delivered
tribute, when we went to Campech to deliver tribute, and we came back
when the Spaniards coming on the road from Campech came to the towns to
dwell at Ichcanzihoo, the city of Merida; and when it was heard that the
Spaniards were coming on the road from Campech we went to give them
gifts, and I went the second time to deliver tribute. And I Nakuk Pech
of this district of Chac Xulub Chen, and Ah Macom Pech of the district
Yan Kukul, and Ixkil Ytzam Pech the head chief of Conkal, and also I
Nakuk Pech, chief here in the town Chac Xulub Chen, entered into giving
gifts to them a second time at Ɔibikal, and they wished an abundance a
second time, and they were given gifts, pheasants, and honey, and sweet
food at Ɔibilkal, when they came to settle at Merida; Don Francisco de
Montejo, first Captain General, first came here to this land, to Merida,
with Don Francisco de Bracamonte and Francisco Tamayo and Juan de
Pacheco and Perarberes; these captains came in the year 1541.

7. In the year when these captains who commanded came to Merida to
settle, then I, Ix Nakuk Pech, was chief, and when the Spaniards came to
Merida, I paid tribute to the conquerors at Merida, as I was then chief
here in the district Chac Xulub Chen, Roderigo Alvarez being Secretary
in the year 1542.

8. When the Adelantado made the distribution of towns to the conquerors
by the captains, and the Secretary Roderigo Alvarez wrote out the list
of tributes according to each division of the towns, all my companions
and kinsmen paid tribute, sufficient tribute according to the division
of tribute to the Spaniards which the Adelantado made by the captains,
and the Secretary Roderigo Alvarez, in the first year the Spaniards came
to Merida; and I, Nakuk Pech, was taken and given to Don Julian Doncel
the Encomendero, the first lord of the town Chac Xulub Chen, the first
Encomendero, and my hand was given him by the captain Don Francisco de
Montejo, and I was given for a chief to Don Julian Doncel, in his hand,
and I began to take tribute for the holy fathers.

9. And I, Nakuk Pech, was thus chief when Alvarez, the first Alcalde
Mayor, came to this province Yucatan, to Merida, and when Alvara de
Carvayor was Alcalde Mayor; and when the Auditor Thomas Lopez came I was
chief, and I was called Ix Nakuk Pech, and when I entered the water and
received baptism, I was called Don Pablo Pech; and I ceased to be called
Nakuk Pech; we first chiefs were created hidalgos by the captains when
possession was first taken of this province, and we first paid tribute
to the foreigners, and possession was given to us by God and the ruling
king; and our descendants are hidalgos, and all our sons, until the time
shall come when the world shall end; and we chiefs were rulers in this
land when there was no Holy Church in the districts, and before the
Spaniards began to march over the country, or to congregate together in
order to worship; and formerly, when the men were not Christians, I
ruled wholly the men, and when I received Christianity I, Nakuk Pech, I
was a chief; and I received the Holy Oils and the Holy Faith in order
that I might teach it to all my subjects; and I was also the first to
receive the rod of the justicia, because I went to aid the Word of God
and our great Lord the ruling king; then our Lord, the Auditor Don
Thomas Lopez, was the first who divided the tribute of the chiefs
according to the towns they occupied; and when the tribute was
satisfactorily finished by the governorship of the Auditor Don Thomas
Lopez, I gave my rod to my son Don Pedro Pech, in the year 1552.

10. This was the number of the year when I received the rod from my
father, Nakuk Pech, Don Pablo Pech and of Ursula Pech, here in this town
of Chac Xulub Chen, to serve God and our great ruler, the reigning king,
in order that I may govern the town at this place Chac Xulub Chen.

11. The first descendants of Macan Pech and of Ah Kom Pech, of Xulkum
Chel, came to their towns with their priests and chiefs, to the town of
Yaxkukul, to Xulkum Chel and to Maxtunil; they came back with their
companions to this town; they came also with their priests and chiefs
and ministers back to their rulers, when they came to the town Yaxkukul;
and we, also, when we arrived at this town of Chac Xulub Chen. When we
settled here they appointed me, Nakuk Pech, by my father, Ah Kom Pech,
son of Ah Tunal Pech, first descendant of Maxtunil, to govern this town.

12. When the Spaniards came to the towns of this land there were no
Indians who had a will to pay tribute to the first Spaniards; therefore
the first Spaniards made an account of what towns were to be given to be
governed. I, Nakuk Pech, I first received the town here, in the district
Chac Xulub Chen, when first they came with orders to take it, with the
chiefs, and captains and priests, whose names are Ah Kul Matu and (Ah)
Kul Che; and the first priests arrived, the priest Cocom, the priest
Tacu; and the captains arrived, the captain Nachan Cen and the captain
Xuluc, as their names were, the captains who commanded when they came to
this land Maxtunil, with the priest Chuc and his captains, to take
possession; thus they found the town here, Chac Xulub Chen, when came
the soldiers and ensigns, Ensign Kan, Ensign Xuluc, Ensign Pot, Ensign
May, Ensign Ek, such were the names of the ensigns, the names of those I
commanded as chief when I, Nakuk Pech, came to this town Chac Xulub
Chen; thus my mind was strengthened when these things happened, and when
I came here to settle here in the land and district Chac Xulub Chen.

13. I, Nakuk Pech, came here by (order of) the governor that I should
strengthen the town Chac Xulub Chen; then among old men there was no
sign that the Spaniards would come here to this land, nor was the
village of Chac Xulub Chen strengthened then; it was when they heard the
account, when the Spaniards came to the city of Merida and Christianity
was received by the men of the province of Ceh Pech. I finished by
gathering together all the town of Chac Xulub Chen, I, Don Pablo Pech,
and my father, Don Martin Pech, Conquistador of Xulkum Cheel.

14. When the war against the Spaniards began we spread out our forces
together with them, and went with my father, Ah Macan Pech, of the first
lineage of Yaxkukul, and Ixkil Yɔam Pech, of the first lineage of
Cumkal, and I went after them to the war; then began the obligation of
tribute to our rulers for the Spanish governors in the town; when we
went to the war there was _pinole_ and _tuce_ to drink, because they
were disgusted with the Christians; for six months we and my companions
followed the Christians in their misfortunes; my father was then
governed by the regidors, who saw that all that I write in my
information truly happened, everything, in order that it may be known by
my family, my sons, in the hereafter, until the end of the world, for my
title and evidence given me by our Lord God and our great lord, the
reigning king; I have no tribute nor do I pay tribute, nor will my sons
nor my daughters pay tribute, because our Lord God released me from it
in the fear of my heart; before I had seen the face of the Spaniards I
had been given willingness that I should deliver myself and all my town
into the hands of the Spaniards, in order that they might be inhabited
by the captains, the Adelantado and the first conquistadores who came
here to this land, Yucatan; and the year the first foreigners came here
to the land of the Cupuls was the year 1511.

15. In former times no one saw Spanish foreigners, not until Jeronimo de
Aguilar was captured by the natives of Cozumel; then first the whole of
the country became known, because all the country was marched over; but
because the whole of the land was not made use of I spoke of it before
the king, when there went before the king Ah Macan Pech, Don Pedro Pech,
and his followers, and the first of his lineage, and all his chiefs
after him; they went after him to honor the king, that he might see the
faces of his servants; then fifty of the principal men went afterwards
to the lord the ruling king, to obey him at table, far off in Spain, and
those remained to obey before the ruling King; then the ruler said that
all should pay tribute and all their sons, even we the Pechs of the
first lineage in this land, and the first lineage of the Cupuls; then it
was said, there is a great province, and many men and things in the
land, and an account shall be made of it before our great king, and now
they shall come to fix the limits of the land for our beloved king. Thus
the land was discovered by Aguilar, who was eaten by Ah Naum Ah Pat at
Cuzamil in the year 1517. In this year the katun ended, and then ended
the placing of the town stone, for at each twentieth stone they came to
place the town stones, formerly, when the Spaniards had not yet come to
Cuzamil, to this land; since the Spaniards came, it has ceased to be
done.

16. In the year 1519 first came the Spaniards here to Cuzamil, for the
third time, Fernando de Cortes and Espoblaco Lara. On the 28th of
February, there came to Cuzamil for the first time those who knew to
speak the true words. In this year the eaters of anonas first arrived at
Chichen, and then for the first time Chichen Itza became known to the
great Spaniards, (and) to Don Francisco de Montejo, Adelantado, the
governor, when they were posted at Chichen Ytza.

17. In the year 1521, on the 13th day of August, the territory of Mexico
was taken by the Spaniards. The third attack on the same Spaniards took
place by all the towns here in the town of Cupul, when they asked Ah Ceh
Pech about the killing at Zalibna, and his companion-king Cen Pot of
Tixkokhoch of the province of Ticanto, with the priest Ich Kak Mo of
Itzmal the companion of Holtun Ake. The year in which the Spaniards
arrived at Chichen Itza for the second time to settle at Chichen Itza
was that when arrived the captain Don Francisco de Montejo, the just
one, leader of the Cupuls. They arrived at the town twenty years after
they arrived at Chichen Ytza (the first time), where they were called
eaters of anonas, biters of anonas.

18. In the year 1542, the Spaniards settled the territory of Merida; the
first speaker, the companion priest Kinich Kakmo and the king of the
Tutulxiu of the capital Mani humbled their heads, and the first families
were settled; then first they came under tribute the third time (the
Spaniards) came to this land, and they established themselves
permanently, and stopped here. The first time when they came here to
Chichen Itza they began to eat anonas; never before had anonas been
eaten, and when the Spaniards ate them they were called anona-eaters;
the second time they came to Chichen they stopped at the house of the
Captain Cupul; the third time they arrived they settled permanently, in
the year 1542 they settled permanently in the territory of Merida, the
13th Kan being the year-bearer, according to the Maya reckoning.

19. In the year 1543 the Spaniards went north of the Chels to procure
Maya men for servants because there were no men for servants at Merida;
they came to procure men for servants for their bidding; when they
reached Popce the tribute was increased by those from Merida, when those
who command arrived at Popce, and they went on to Tikom, and the
Spaniards remained at that time in Tikom more than twenty days before
they departed.

20. In the year 1544 the Spanish Captain Asiesa was posted in Cauaca,
and the chiefs were gathered together from Cauaca for the tribute, and
they gave in Cauca honey, pheasants and maize; then they placed in
prison the priest Caamal from Sisal, and asked for an account of all the
towns; one year he was kept by them in prison; he then served as guide
to the Spaniards when they came to Valladolid, and this priest Kamal of
Sisal entered as chief at Valladolid, and was called Don Juan Caamal de
la Cruz, because he spoke very truthfully; he first introduced the cross
in Cauaca, and he was listened to by the Spaniards, and for this he
entered as chief at Sisal, and being chief a long time he died. He was
also guide to the Spaniards when they went to war with Tixkochnah; and
when the Spaniards had been posted one year in Cauaca, they went forth
and came to Valladolid on purpose to see the men the chief Kamal had
placed in prison.

21. In the year 1545 the Spaniards were posted at Valladolid, and in
this year Christianity began by the fathers of the order of San
Francisco in the port of Champoton; there first came the fathers having
in their hands the Redeemer Jesus Christ by name, that they might teach
the serving men; and first they came to the port of Champutun to the
west of this province called here Ichcansiho, then to Merida, the town
Ichcansiho as it is called. These are the names of the fathers who began
Christianity in this country Yucatan, Fr. Juan de la Puerta, and Fr.
Luis de Villarpando, and Fr. Diego de Becal, and Fr. Juan de Guerrero,
and Fr. Merchol de Benavente, these began Christianity in the west of
this country, before Christianity came here to Cupul; afterwards the
trumpet of Christianity came here, as I was saying, and it began here at
Cupul.

22. In the year 1546 there was a conjuration in the highlands of the
country; on the 9th of November there had been peace for four months,
and it occurred on the 9th day of November of the year 1546 that there
was war after four months: it began and continued for one year among the
men, when they were gathered together for the second time for the
tribute of wax; when the war began it took place that the conjurors came
from the west to deceive the people and to set in order the war; the
conjuror Cunul and Ah Camal came from the west and killed the Spaniards
and two sons of the Spaniards, scholars at Mena; they died at Chamax,
where they wished to remain; then came to Valladolid all the Spaniards
who were well when the war broke out, and then began the massacre; the
conjuror Camal Tipakan, of Pakam, killed Surusano over against Nicte; at
the towns one night the Spaniards were slain because the people fell
sick in their hands and feet; there was then for a day and a night war
in all the towns.

23. In the year 1547 a ship was destroyed by Ex Box at Ecab; then the
Spaniards went to make him fear, and made war against Box of Ecab, son
of Ek Box.

24. In the year 1548 the father Ermitanyo came to Valladolid to begin
Christianity.

25. In the year 1550 there was a general reunion of the towns and their
dependencies at Mani.

26. In the year 1551 the father guardian, Fr. Fernando Guerrero, came
from Valladolid to Sisal and he baptized the people and introduced
Christianity here into all the territory of Valladolid west of the
Chels; they came from Ecab, they came from Cozumel, they came from the
north, they came from the south, and also he began the building of the
monastery Valladolid-Sisal.

27. In the year 1552 the fathers settled here; in this year they came to
teach and sing here at Sisal, they came from the west to teach and sing
mass vespers with the singing of the organ and flute, and the canto
llano, which never before did we know here.

In the year 1553 the Auditor, Don Thomas Lopez arrived here in this land
of Yucatan from Castilla, and he arrived as a messenger from our great
ruler, the reigning king of Castilla, to protect us against the hand of
the Spaniards here. He put a stop to our being burned by the Spaniards,
he put a stop to our being bitten by dogs, he introduced the appointing
of chiefs in each village by the giving of the baton; he also adjusted
the tribute for the third time, the tribute introduced by the Spaniards,
mantles, wax, pheasants, maize, buckets, salt, peppers, broad beans,
narrow beans, jars, pots, vases, all for tribute to our Spanish rulers,
which we paid before the Auditor had given his attention to these
things. At this time occurred the capture of the priest Chuuc by Ah
Macan Pech when we left Sisal, because he wished the priest Chuc to be
captured, as he had prevented the capture of Ah Ceh Pech here in Cupul;
afterwards the priest Pech, Macan Pech with the servants of Macan Pech
and his captains, came here to this town of Yaxkukul.

28. From the year 1519 when the Spaniards came here to the town of Conah
Itza, here in this land, Yucatan, I have set forth the days, the months
and the years as above stated, I, Don Pablo Pech, the son of Don Martin
Pech of Xul Kum Cheel, conquistador, here at Maxtunil and Chac Xulub
Chen; since we received the Spaniards with good will and heart, nor did
we make war upon them, Don Juan de Montejo, Adelantado, and the rest of
the captains, as their names are in the book; we also first received
Christianity, we the conquistadores, Don Martin son of Don Fernando
Pech, Don Pablo Pech son of Don Martin Pech, on the 13th day of the
month of October, 1518; all my subjects received baptism in Maxtunil;
they were baptized by the first bishop to the Maya people, Don Francisco
Toral; and when he baptized us our father the bishop showed the images
of the saints to all the villages, images of Saint Peter and St. Paul,
and St. John and St. Louis, and St. Antony, and St. Michael, and St.
Francis, and St. Alonzo, and St. Augustin and St. Sebastian, and St.
Diego; and they desired the oils, and he who was called Peter took the
oils.

29. Such is the chronicle of everything I have collected for the books,
in order that the people might know it, whoever wished to know it, as
had decreed it from the beginning our great lord God who governs the
universe. It is the declaration of how the Spaniards came to this land,
here to this country; by the will of the lord, the ruling God, also by
the orders of our lord Don Juan de Montejo, and Don Francisco de
Montejo, who first came here to this land, and gave orders that churches
should be built in the plastered villages, in the outlying districts,
and a town house and a temple for our great ruler, and also a public
house for travelers.

30. Thus also said our great father, Ah Naum Pech, Don Francisco de
Montejo Pech, and Don Juan Pech, as were their names when they were
baptized by the fathers; and as the Adelantado, the Captain, those who
came here to this land Yocol Peten, but called Yucatan by the first
Spaniards, as they the Spaniards, clearly relate. When our lord the
Spaniards said that we are to live eternally with God, and when the Maya
men heard the names, then spoke Naum Pech to those he commanded, with
suavity:--"Know ye, there comes to the town the one God, to the country
the true God, the sign of the true God; go ye to live with Him, joyfully
receive Him, do not war against Him, and if they have not to eat or
drink give them maize, fowls, pheasants, honey, beans to eat, that
Christianity may enter and that we may be servants of God;" thus they
wished it, and they did not make war, but rose up and went to aid the
Spaniards in the conquest and marched together with the foreigners.

31. Thus also Nachi Cocom, who dwelt in the chief town of Zututa in the
province Chichen Itza, that called Chichen Itza, and Ah Cahuot Cocom,
aiding the word of God and our great King, delivered up their standards
and banners for the sake of our great King, for the conquest, and
received the Adelantado and the father the priest in their towns, nor
did they make war, but abstained from all injury, and laid out churches
and town-houses for their followers.

32. And Naɔi Mabun Chan settled in the district, and understood that
the eternal life had come to his village, and wished that to God truly
would be delivered the Catzins and Chuls in the district of Mani, and
the Tutulxiu, and the Chels in the East, and the (middle) Tan Cupuls and
in Campeche Naɔacab Canul; thus this earth was given by God to be
redeemed, this land Zacuholpatal Zacmutixtun; and Tunal Pech of Mutul
settled here in this town.

33. And Ah Naum Pech called the youths and said to him--"Know ye, that
on the day called 1 Ymix it will dawn, there will come from the eastern
lands bearded men with the sign of the only God to this land; go to
receive them with true pleasure;" therefore they went and marched under
the trees, under the branches, and they arrived at the house of Naɔay
Cab, of Canul at Campech and said:--"He, your guest, is now coming, Ah
Naɔa Cab of Canul, receive him promptly." Thus they said when the
ships appeared in the port of Campeche, when they saw the banners
waving, the white standard, and they came, when he had cast anchor, to
the Adelantado, and were asked in Castilian by the Christians, and the
Adelantado, whether they had been baptized; but they did not know his
language, and replied: "We do not understand the words;" so they said,
and thus they named this land here Yucatan, (which was known to us as)
the land of the wild turkey, the land of the deer.

34. Thus then the captains and our lord the Adelantado Don Francisco de
Montejo went on; and they made much cloth and thread to cut into
clothing for the horses, as they wished to go to the town of Mani, to
the Tutulxiu. When they came to Yiba they held a talk in Yiba; they
arrived at Nohcacab coming out of Becal; thus the Spaniards passed and
arrived at Mani, to Tutulxiu, and then were appointed the chief Ikeb,
the chief Caixicum and the chief Chuc to go to invite Ah Cuat Cocom.
They were at first taken and placed in a cave by his followers: then
their eyes were put out in that great cave of weasels, and there was not
one who did not have his eyes put out in the cave of weasels; their eyes
were put out and they were given the road to go groping to the
Adelantado at Mani; and thus returned those who were cast out of the
town of Cuat Cocom. Then Ah Naum Pech rose up with both of them and came
to Ah Cuat Cocom; when they arrived, he said to Ah Naum Pech that he had
not seen nor heard of it; he said he had gone to Chichen Itza, and he
came promptly to the towns with the Pechs, and they arrived at Mani to
deliver up promptly (the offenders); and the Cocom said he had not
witnessed what had happened in his village, and he would give permission
that they should be taken who had done it.

35. Then Ah Pech came to the towns in order to see the people governed
in them; the Spaniards also came, but on account of the massacre of the
foreigners by the people, they passed on and went to Ah Batum Pech of
Chel, whom they saw, and passed on, and went to Maxtunil, to Nachi May
and Ah Macan Pech; they then returned to their lands to the towns they
governed at Yaxkukul; Don Pablo Pech, Ah Macan Pech, was governor of all
the district to the west, nor did his captains at all give up their
spirits; soon I was appointed to guard the territory Chac Xulub Chen,
because the serving men were at war on account of the labor given them,
and by taking them the will of God was fulfilled in the towns.

36. Such is the complete history of how passed the Spaniards and how the
first fathers were received, and the names of the first conquerors I
shall set forth according to the register, because this is composed in
order that it may be known how the conquest occurred, and in what manner
they labored here, under the trees, under the branches[TN-26] under the
bushes, in those years and months; and what the people and their sons
found to eat; for from two to three years they labored in the
distribution of the towns, by our rulers the Spaniards; they also
labored in the measuring of the towns, and the measuring of the forests
of the towns by the Auditor Tomas Lopez, holding in his hand the Cedula
of our great lord the king, that forests should be cut by whoever
settled. When there were no towns we were natives here of official
houses, Naum Pech being governor of all, nor at that time had the
Spaniards come here to establish Christianity in this land; but when the
day came that their arrival took place, when the Spaniards came to this
land Yucatan, we received them with a friendly heart, and Christianity
was introduced into this land, and we were appointed to guard the
villages, when as yet there was no church; and now they have ceased
building official houses or villages.

37. Thus I began to relate how the conquest took place and how many
sufferings we underwent with our lords, the Spaniards, from the natives
who were not willing to deliver themselves to God; thus I recount what I
heard concerning the town Maxtunil.

38. We did not settle there, but descended to the town Chac Xulub Chen,
and when the Holy Church was finished in Cumtal, we measured its sides
and took possession so that our children should remain there from the
beginning until the end of the world, so that the natives should not
obstruct us, nor enchant by the throwing of stones anything which had
been given us by God and our lord through the fear of our hearts; for
this our great lord the ruling king gave us the authority; and when the
church was prepared in which to worship our lord and God, and the public
house to the east of the church and the temple of our great king and the
residence.

39. I also built my house of stone to the north of the church. And that
the natives may not in the future say that it belongs to them, for this
I show forth the occurrences as I did them with my father, I, Don Pablo
Pech, Ah Macan Pech, and my father Don Martin Pech, Ah Com Pech, my lord
Señor Don Ambrosio Pech, his native name being Op Pech, and Ixil Yzam
Pech, and Don Esteban Pech, Ah Culub Pech.

40. We received the royal commissions to measure the forests. The
license was given by our great monarch the ruling king through our lord
the first auditor, Tomas Lopez, that he should give us years ago his
order that the uncultivated fields should be measured wherever they are,
here back of the town, that we may know where the boundaries of our
lands pass in order that parents and children may maintain them and give
food to the Encomenderos. Therefore I swear before the people that this
information is true, that they may have it in sight so that no
uncultivated field shall entrench upon another uncultivated field; for
this reason I set forth the truth.

41. The first Encomendero here in Chac Xulub Chen was Don Julian Doncel,
who ordered the chiefs that they should go to place the marks of the
limits of their forest lands here back of the towns they governed, and
thus they were led to measure the boundaries of their lands and the
forests toward the East, the South and the West, for the benefit of all
who dwell therein; because already Christianity was established in this
land of Chac Xulub Chen with our holy lord Santiago the patron who
guards the town of Don Pablo Pech.


NOTES.

1. "The fifth division of the 11th Ahau Katun was placed" (_i. e._ in
the wall or in the Katun Stone), (see page 57, where this expression is
explained). In other words, the first arrival of the Spaniards at Merida
took place at the close of the 11th Ahau Katun. This was July, 1541, and
it is in gratifying conformity with Bishop Landa, who also states that
that month was the commencement of a 20-year period; but he says that at
that date the 11th Katun began, while Pech goes on to say that it was
the next in order, the 9th. (See Landa, _Relacion_, p. 314.)

_Noh cah te ti Ho_, the great town at Ho. This was the native name of
the ancient city which stood on the present site of Merida, and, by the
Mayas, is in use to this day. _Ho_ is the numeral 5, and some have
supposed that the name was given on account of five large mounds or
buildings said to have been conspicuous in the ancient city. That there
were precisely five is not positively stated by the old historians,
though four are specified. This theory would suppose that the name was
given to the city only after these large structures were completed, and
that its name during that time had been lost. But this is not
improbable.

In fact, the ancient name of Merida was not Ho, but _Ichcanzihoo_, as
appears from a later passage in Pech's narrative and from numerous
others in the Books of Chilan Balam. _Ho_ is only the abbreviation of
this long name. It appears to mean "The five (temples) of many
serpents." _Can_ is the generic term for serpent, and _ich_ used as a
prefix denotes a place where there is an abundance of what the noun
means: thus _ichche_=a place where the trees are tall and dense;
_ichxiu_, a place where the grass is tall and thick (_Diccionario de
Motul_). The serpents were probably those sculptured in stone or painted
on the walls. This theory receives additional probability from an entry
in the _Diccionario de Motul_, MS., which relates that the largest mound
in ancient Merida, situated back of the present convent of San
Francisco, was called by the natives _ahchuncan_, and that this was the
name of the idol which used to be worshiped there. Its signification
would be "the first or primitive serpent," or "the first speaker,"
_i. e._ oracle, as _can_ means both serpent and speech.

The temples at Ho were not in use when the Spaniards arrived, nor had
they been for many generations. Apparently only a few huts of wood and
straw made up the village, while these vast ruins were even then covered
to the summit with a heavy growth of timber in all respects like the
virgin forest around them. This is clearly stated by the Friar Lorenzo
de Bienvenida, who came to Merida in 1545. I quote his expressions from
a letter to the King in 1548:--

"La ciudad esta la tierra adentro treinta y tres leguas; llamase la
_ciudad de Merida_; pusieronle asi por los edificios superbos que hai en
ella, que en todo lo descubierto en Indias no se han hallado tan
superbos edificios, de canteria bien labrada, i grandes las piedras; no
hai memoria de quien los hizó; parecenos que se hicieron antes de la
venida de Christo porque tan grande estaba el monte encima dellos como
en lo bajo de la tierra; son altos de cinco estados de piedra seca i
encima los edificios, quatro quartos todo de celdas como de Frailes, de
veinte pies de luengo i de diez de ancho, i todas las portadas de una
piedra, lo alto de la puerta i de boveda, i destos hai en la tierra
otros muchos. Esta gente natural no habitaba en ellos, ni hacen casa
sino de paja y madera, habiendo mas apareja de cal i piedra que en todo
lo descubierto. En estos edificios tomamos sitio los Frailes para casa
de San Francisco; lo que habia sido cultura de demonios, justo es que
sea templo donde se sirve à Dios, etc." (_Carta de Fr. Lorenzo de
Bienvenida, 1548, MS._)

The date, 1511, given as that of the first arrival of the Spaniards,
refers to the shipwreck of Aguilar and his companions, who in that year
were thrown on the eastern coast.

This introductory paragraph was entirely miscontrued[TN-27] by Avila, and
nearly as much so by Brasseur. I add their translations to illustrate
this.


_Translation of Avila._

"A la quinta vez que sentó el noveno Rey en la guerra cuando llegaron
los Españoles que se poblaron en la ciudad de Merida, el principal Rey
de esa ciudad era siempre cacique y el año en que llegaron los Señores
Españoles aqui en esta suelo fué el de 1511."


_Translation of Brasseur._

"C'est à la cinquième division cimentée (dans le mur) de ce onzième
Ahau-Katun qu'arrivèrent les Espagnols et qu'ils s'établirent à Ti-Uoh
de ce pays de Ti-Ho, et c'est à la neuvième de cet Ahau que s'établit le
Christianisme, cette année même que vinrent nos seigneurs les Espagnols
en cette contrée, c'est à dire, en l'année 1511."

It will be seen that the former completely travesties the passage, while
the latter mistakes the proper names and destroys the chronological
value of the dates given.

2. _Hidalgos conquistadoren_, Spanish titles which we are surprised to
find a native claiming; but later on (§ 9) he informs us that he was
authorized to employ them by the Spanish officials.

Chichinica was a pueblo near Chicxulub, which is now no longer in
existence.

3. _Ti ma ococ haa tin pol cuchi_, "formerly, when the water will not
entered to my head" _i. e._, before I was baptized. This complicated
construction of the negative (_ma_), a future (_ococ_ from _ocol_) and
the sign of the past tense (_cuchi_), also occurs on an earlier page
(98), where we have the sentence _uacppel haab u binel ma ɔococ u
xocol oxlahun ahau cuchi_, six years before the end of the 13th ahau.
_Ocol haa_, syncopated to _ocola_, and even _oca_, was the usual term
for Christian baptism.

Xulkumcheel was a pueblo which does not seem to have survived.

_Ah Naum Pech, likul tu cah Mutul._ Ah Naum Pech from, or native of, the
town Mutul. The latter is the modern Motul, about 22 miles easterly from
Chicxulub. The name is also spelled Mutul by Cogolludo (_Historia de
Yucatan_, Lib. VI, cap. VII).

_Halach uinic_, previously explained, was the ancient native title of
chief of a village. It is the same word which Oviedo, in his report of
Grijalva's expedition deforms into _calachini_ (_Historia de las
Indias_, Lib. XVII).

The date, 1519, like various others in the narrative, appears to have
been erroneously entered or copied. It should probably be 1539.
_Maxtunil_ does not at present exist. _Ɔilam_ is a town north of
Itzamal, near the sea coast. It is by some identified as the spot where
Francisco de Montejo embarked after his retreat from Chichen Itza, in
1528.

4. The _Kupuls_ were the family who reigned in the eastern province,
where Valladolid was founded. They long retained their hostility to the
Spaniards. _Ekab_ was situated on the coast opposite the island of
Cozumel. _Ɔekom_ should probably read Tekom. _Tixcuumcuuc_ no longer
exists. _Tinuum_ is a town 4 leagues north of Valladolid, on the road to
Itzamal. _Ɔi Ɔantun_ is a town north of Itzamal, said by Sanchez Aguilar
to have been the ancient capital of the princely house of the Chels.
_Ake_ is probably the modern Ɔonataké. _Catzim_ is now the name of a
hacienda in the Department of Itzamal, some distance from the coast.
_Ɔelebna_ is unknown.

The expression _tumen naob Bon cupul_, translated by Avila "porque esa
casa es de Bon Cupul," I think is an error of the copyist for _tumen
nacon Cupul_. See also § 18.

5. _Hokzah uba_, they betook themselves. The termination _uba_ is that
of the third person of reflexive verbs.

Nachi May, already mentioned, was a member of an ancient princely house
mentioned by Landa and Sanchez Aguilar. One of them, Ahkin May, was
apparently the hereditary high priest. The effort has been made to
derive from their name the word _Maya_, and Brasseur would carry us to
Haiti in order to discover its meaning (Landa, _Relacion_, p. 42, note),
but this is unnecessary. _May_ in the Maya tongue means "a hoof," as of
a deer, and is a proper name still in use. There is no reason to suppose
it in any way connected with _Maya_.

_Matanok_ I take to be an error for _matanon_, from _mat_ (pret.
_matnahi_).

6. _Ɔibikal_ may be, as suggested by Dr. Berendt, Tipikal, a town in
the district of Merida. There is another of the name in the Sierra Alta
(_Estadistica de Yucatan_, 1814).

Francisco de Bracamonte is mentioned by Cogolludo as among the first
settlers of Merida.

7. Cogolludo mentions Rodrigo Alvarez as "Escribano del juzgado," who
came with Montejo (_Historia de Yucatan_, Lib. III, cap. VI, and
elsewhere).

8. _U toxol cahob_, the distribution of the towns, literally "the
pouring out;" Avila translates it by "cuando se repartian los pueblos."
The Spanish system of "repartimientos" and "encomiendas" was adopted in
Yucatan,[TN-28]

9. The licentiate Alvares de Caravajal was alcalde mayor from 1554 to
1558. (Cogolludo, _Hist. de Yucatan_, Lib. V. cap. XV.)

10. This was apparently written by Don Pablo Pech, the son of the writer
of the remainder of the history, and inserted in order to corroborate
the statement just made by his father, that the latter had transferred
the magistracy to him.

11. The _holpop_, literally "head of the mat," perhaps because when the
company sat around or on the mat his place was at its head, was the
official who had charge of the _tunkul_ or wooden drum, with which
public meetings, dances, summons to war, etc. were proclaimed, and with
which the priests accompanied their voices in reciting the ancient
chants (Cogolludo, _Hist. de Yucatan_, Lib. IV, cap. V). He was called
_ahholpop_, and had charge of the public hall of the village, the
_popolna_, "casa de comunidad," in which public business was transacted
(_Diccionario de Motul_, MS.)[TN-29]

The _ahkulel_ was the official second in command in a town or district.
He acted in place of the _batab_ or the _ahcuchcab_. The verb _kulel_
means to transact business for another, to act as deputy.

_Ahkin_ was the ordinary word for priest in the old language; kin, sun,
day, time; _ahkin_, he who was familiar with the days and times, with
the calendar, and also with the past and the future.

12. _U chun u thanob_; the _chunthan_ or _ahchunthan_, literally, he who
has the first word, was the member of the village who took the leading
part in matters of business. The office and name are still in existence
in the native village communities of Yucatan. (See Garcia y Garcia,
_Historia de la Guerra de Castas en Yucatan_, Introd., p. xli.)

The _ahkul_ was an envoy or messenger, who carried the orders of the
prince to his people and to foreign princes. The title was usually
prefixed to the name of the person.

The _holcan_, "head caller," was a military official in each village,
whose duty it was when war was announced to summon the men in his
district capable of bearing arms (see Landa, _Relacion_, p. 174). The
Spanish writers translate it by _alferez_.

The _nacon_ was an elective war chief, who held his position for the
term of three years (Landa, _Relacion_, pp. 161, 173). The name is
derived from _nacal_, to rise, go up, and hence as a delegate or elected
representative (as is stated by the _Dicc. de Motul_).

13. The _nucteelob_ were the _ancianos_, the wise old men of the
village; _manak_, a trace or sign that appears at a distance and then
disappears. _U manak uinic ti ulah_=I saw the trace of a man to-day, but
it is no longer visible. _Diccionario de Motul, MS._

"The province of Ceh Pech" was that in which Merida was: "_u tzucub
ahcehpechob_, la provincia de los Peches al lado de Motul y Cumkal."
_Dicc. de Motul, MS._

14. _Kah_, _pinole_, is a drink made by mixing the meal of roasted maize
with water. The word _tuce_ (or, it may be, _tuze_) I do not find in any
dictionary, nor does Avila translate it. The passage is an obscure one.
Avila renders it "cuando fuimos à la guerra, bebian piñole y _tuce_,
porque estaban enojados con los Cristianos." Possibly these were two
articles of food especially used on warlike raids.

_U zahacil in puczical_, a cant phrase probably borrowed from the
missionaries="the fear of my heart,"--in my humbleness. _Puczikal_
appears to be a root-word, though of three syllables. It means the heart
of men and animals, also the mind or soul, the desires, and the interior
of certain growths, as the pith of maize, etc. (_Dicc. de Motul._)

The year 1511 was that of the shipwreck of the deacon Geronimo de
Aguilar and his companions, who were the first whites known to the
natives of Yucatan.

The reference which is made in this section to a deputation of fifty
natives to Spain, is not mentioned, so far as I remember, by other
historians. As in some respects my translation differs from that of
Avila, I give his.

"Cuando llegò ante el monarca Ahmacan Pech, D^on Pedro Pech, y sus
deudos, sus primeros descendientes, sus capitanes, todos fueron con el
para honrar el monarca y vea la cara á sus vasallos indigenas, y escogió
cincuenta de los grandes de ellos para llevar tras de el al monarca
reinante para servirlos en la mesa alli lejos en España, pero los que
vomitaron en el festejo delante del monarca reinante, esos entonces dijò
el Rey que pagaron tributos todos y todos sus descendientes, mas
nosotros los Peches," etc.

The phrase _mac xenahi tu tzicile_ Avila translates "who vomited at the
feasts;" but I believe _xenhi_, vomited, is a misreading for _xanhi_,
remained, and _tzicil_ is obedience, as serving-men.

_Lae te hantabi_, who was eaten; Aguilar himself was not eaten, as he
was rescued by Cortes, in 1519, and served him as interpreter. But some
of his companions were eaten by the natives, not of Cozumel, but of the
coast to the south, and this is what Pech meant to say, unless,
indeed--and I am inclined to prefer this view--we read _hantezahbi_
instead of _hantabi_, which would give the sense "the land was
discovered by Aguilar, who was given food (supported, maintained) by Ah
Naum," etc. For particulars about Aguilar see Herrera, _Hist. de las
Indias_, Dec. II, Lib. IV, cap. VIII.

_Lai yabil hauic_, etc. This is an important sentence, as fixing a date
in the ancient chronology. _U tunil balcah_ is an ancient term, not
explained in the dictionaries. _Balcah_ (or _baalcah_) means "a town and
the people who compose it" (Pio Perez, _Diccionario_), hence people, the
world, as the French use _monde_. From many references in the Maya
manuscripts I derive the impression that the last stone in the katun
pillar was placed in turn by the towns, each giving its name to the
stone and the cycle (see ante, p. 171).

Assuming the correctness of the figures 1517--and there is no reason to
doubt it--then Pech counted the katuns as of 24 years each, as Pio Perez
maintained was correct; because he has already informed us in his
introductory paragraph that the year 1541 was the close of the 11th
Ahau, and 1541-1517=24.

16. The two previous visits referred to were probably those of Cordova,
1517, and Grijalva, 1518. "Those who knew to speak the true words,"
refers to the Catholic priests. All the historians of Cortes' expedition
dwell on the effect produced on the natives of Cozumel by the religious
services he held there.

The date, Feb. 28, 1519, seems correct, although it is not mentioned by
any other writer I have at hand. Cortes left Havana, Feb. 19.

_Lai yabil_, "in this year," evidently a date is omitted, as the first
arrival of the Spaniards at Chichen Itza was either at the close of 1526
or beginning of 1527. One of the Maya MSS. gives the year as _bulucil
Muluc_, the 11th Muluc. The Maya year, it will be remembered, began on
the 16th of July.

"It was on the memorable thirteenth of August, 1521, the day of St.
Hippolytus, that Cortes led his warlike array for the last time across
the black and blasted environs which lay around the Indian capital,
etc." Prescott, _Conquest of Mexico_, Book VI, chap. VIII. There is
little doubt but that the tidings of the dreadful destruction of the
mighty Tenochtitlan was rapidly disseminated among the tribes far down
into Yucatan and Central America, and made a profound impression on
them.

This section is confused and difficult. Avila translates:--

"Fueron atacados por tercera vez los mismos Españoles por todos los
pueblos aqui en el pueblo de Cupul cuando hallaron à Ah Ceh Pech
muriendose en una casa no embarrada y à su compañero el otro Rey Cen
Pot," etc.

18. The official date of the founding of the city of Merida was Jan. 6,
1542.

The anona or custard-apple does not seem to have been eaten by the
natives, and it impressed them as strange and somewhat unnatural to
witness the Spaniards suck them.

_Ca u tocahob nao bon Cupul_; this is translated by Señor Avila:
"quemaron al capitan Cupul:" they burned the captain Cupul; but I take
it to be a misreading for _ca u yotochob nacom Cupul_, and have so
translated it. There is no account of a leader of the Cupuls having been
burned, and, moreover, this is in accordance with § 4.

Another important chronological statement is made in this section, to
wit, that the year 1542 (I suppose July 16, 1541-July 15, 1542 is meant)
was 13 Kan. As Pech has already told us that it was also the first year
of the 9th Ahau Katun, we have the date fixed in both methods of
reckoning, that is, by the Kin Katun as well as the Ahau Katun,
according to the calendar which his family used.

19. The town of Tikom is still in existence, but I have not been able to
find Popce on any of the maps. The Chels were a well known princely
family in ancient Yucatan. The _Dicc. de Motul_ says their province was
that of Ɔizantun.

26.[TN-30] The Don Juan Caamal whose acts are briefly sketched in this
section is the same mentioned in the _auto_ given previously, page 117.
It is still a family name in Yucatan (Berendt, _Nombres Proprios en
lengua Maya_, folio. _MS._)[TN-31]

21. The first mission to Yucatan was that of Fr. Jacobo de Testera, with
some companions whose names have not been preserved, 1531 to 1534 (see
Geronimo de Mendieta, _Historia Eclesiastica Indiana_, pp. 380, 665;
Torquemada. _Monarquia Indiana_, Lib. IX, cap. XIII, Lib. XX, cap.
XLVII). They were stationed at Champoton and did not penetrate the
country. The next attempt was in 1537. Testera, then Provincial of
Mexico, sent five Franciscan friars, who returned after two years of
efforts. Their names are unknown (Cogolludo, _Historia de Yucatan_, vol.
I, pp. 175, 182). The third is the one referred to in the text. Its
commissary was Fr. Luis de Villalpando, and its members were Fr. Lorenzo
de Bienvenida, Fr. Melchor de Benavente, Fr. Juan de Herrera, Fr. Juan
de Albalata, and Fr. Angel Maldonado. Five other missionaries came with
Juan de la Puerta, in 1548 (Cogolludo).

22. The term _ahetzil_, I do not find, and translate it as _aheɔil_,
the practice of conjuring, or sorcery. But it is quite possibly for
_ahuitzil_, dwellers in the sierra. The next line is corrupt, and I can
only guess at the meaning. The date, Nov. 9, 1546, is correct, and the
history here given of the insurrection of the natives at that time is
substantially the same as is told at length by Cogolludo (_Hist. de
Yucatan_, Lib. V, cap. VII).

27. The Auditor Tomas Lopez came from Guatemala (not Spain) to Yucatan
in 1551 or 1552, and in the latter year promulgated his "Laws" for the
government of the natives, many of which are given in Cogolludo's
History.

The passing reference to the cruelties of the Spaniards are more than
borne out by the testimony of Fr. Lorenzo de Bienvenida. Writing to the
King in 1548 he says:--

"En esta villa (Valladolid) se levantaron este año de quarenta y siete
los Indios * * * i este levantamiento por mal tratamiento que hacen à
los Indios los Españoles tomandoles las mugeres y hijos y dandoles de
palos i quebrandoles las piernas i brazos i matandolos i desmasiados
tributos i desaforados servicios personales, i si V^a Alt^a no provee de
remedio con brevedad, no es possible permanecer esta tierra, digo de
justicia. * * * *

"(El adelantado) dió la capitania à un sobrino que llaman Manso Pacheco.
Nero no fué mas cruel que este. Este pasó adelante y llegó á una
provincia que llaman _Chatemal_, estando de paz, i sin dar guerra los
naturales la robó i les comió los mantenimientos à los naturales, i
ellos huyendo à los montes de miedo de los Españoles porque en tomando
alguno luego lo aperreaban, i desto huian los Indios i no sembraban i
todos murieron de hambre, digo todos porque habia pueblos de á
quinientos casas i de á mil, i el que agora tiene ciento es mucho;
provincia rica de cacao. Este capitan por sus proprias manos exercitaba
las fuerzas, con un garrote maté muchos i decia, 'este es buen palo para
castigar á estos;' i desque lo habia muerto, 'O, quan bien lo dé.' Corto
muchos pechos á mugeres, i manos á hombres i narices i orejas i estaco,
i á las mugeres ataba calabazas á los pies i las echaba en las lagunas
ahogar por su pasatiempo, i otras grandes crueldades." _Carta de Fr.
Lorenzo de Bienvanida,[TN-32] 1548. MS._

28. The town Conah Itza, or Con Ahitza, Con of the Itzas, may refer to
the seaport, Coni, the eastern coast, where Montejo landed on his first
expedition. Bishop Toral did not arrive in Yucatan until 1562, so the
mention of him proves that this narrative was written after that date.

29. No such person as Juan de Montejo is known.

30. _Yocol peten_; so it is first spelled in the original manuscript,
and afterwards altered to _Yucalpeten_. This latter occurs as a name
applied to the peninsula, or a portion of it, in a number of passages of
the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel. These have been quoted by the
Canon Crescencio Carrillo in a recent work (_Historia Antigua de
Yucatan_, pp. 137, 140, Merida, 1882), to support his view that the name
Yucatan is an abbreviation of Yucalpeten.

Apart from the difficulty of explaining such an extensive abbreviation,
which is not at all in the spirit of the Maya tongue, the words of Pech
in this section and § 33 conclusively prove that the two names are
entirely distinct in origin. Carrillo is of opinion that _yucal_ should
be divided into _y_, _u_, _cal_, and he translates the name "la perla de
la garganta de la tierra ò continente." This appears far-fetched.
_Yocal_ is probably merely _yoc hail_, upon the water (_il_,
determinative ending denoting what water); hence _yocal peten_, the
region upon the water, applied to Yucatan or some part of its coast
district. The _h_ is nearly mute and frequently elided, as in _ocola_
(_ocol haa_) to baptize.

A prophecy of the priest Pech, which is perhaps the one here referred
to, appears in several of the Books of Chilan Balam, and also Spanish
translations of it in the Histories of Lizana and Cogolludo, and a
French version in Brasseur's report of the _Mission Scientifique au
Mexique_, etc.

The text is quite corrupt, but I insert it as I have emended it from a
comparison of three copies.


U THAN AHAU PECH AHKIN.

    Tu kinil uil u natabal kine,
    Yume ti yokcab te ahtepal.
    Uale canɔit u katunil,
    Uchi uale hahal pul.
    Tu kin kue yoklal u kaba,
    In kubene yume.
    Ti a-uich-ex tu bel a uliah, Ahitza,
    U yum cab ca ulom.
    Than tu chun ahau Pech ahkin,
    Tu kinil uil can ahau katun,
    Uale tan hiɔil u katunil.


THE WORD OF THE LORD PECH, THE PRIEST.

    At that time it will be well to know the tidings,
    Of the Lord, the ruler of the world.
    After four katuns,
    Then will occur the bringing of the truth.
    At that time one who is a god by his name,
    I deliver to you as a lord.
    Be your eyes on the road for your guest, Men of Itza,
    When the lord of the earth shall come.
    The word of the first lord, Pech, the priest,
    At the time of the fourth katun,
    At the end of the katun.

The only line in which I have taken much liberty with the text is the
fifth, where, after the word _kue_, one MS. reads: _yok taa ba akauba_,
and another, _yok lac kauba_, neither of which is intelligible.

If the date assigned in these lines be a correct one, they were
delivered by the prophet in 1469. It is not impossible. The words are
obscure and the prediction so indistinct that it might quite well have
been made by an official augur at that time.

31. Nachi Cocom, head of the ancient and powerful Cocom family, ruled at
Zotuta when Montejo made his settlement at Merida, and was a determined
enemy of the Spaniards. He was defeated in 1542, in a sanguinary battle,
and then accepted terms of peace. I have in my possession the copy of a
survey which he made of the lands of the town of Zotuta in 1545, when he
was evidently on good terms with the Conquerors.

32. The names Chan, Catzim and Chul belong to well known ancient
Yucatecan families, and many who bear them are still found among the
natives (Berendt, _Nombres Proprios en Lengua Maya_, MS.)[TN-33]

The words Zacuholpatal Zacmutixtun are rendered by Avila as proper
names, and I have followed his example. I have not found a satisfactory
explanation of them.

33. The day _One Imix_ was a day of peculiar sanctity in ancient
Yucatan. Landa makes the rather unintelligible assertion that the count
of their days, or their calendar, invariably commenced on that day
(_Relacion_, p. 236).

Imix is the 18th day of the month, and it is possibly[TN-34] that it and
the two following days were used for intercalary days.

More to the purpose of explaining the prophecy in the text is the
statement of Francisco Hernandez, who, as reported by Bishop Las Casas,
relates that in the mythology of the Mayas, the god or gods Bacab, those
who support the four corners of the heaven and who are identified with
the "year bearers" or Dominical days of the calendar, died on the day
One Imix, and after three days came to life again. (Las Casas, _Historia
Apologetica de las Indias Occidentales_, cap. CXXIII.) This has
reference apparently to the intercalary days Imix, Ik, and Akbal, which
were counted so as to allow the next Kin Katun period to begin on
I[TN-35] Kan. I have explained this theory fully in a paper, "Notes on
the Codex Troano and Maya Chronology," in the _American Naturalist_,
Sept. 1881. Naturally this was supposed by the Spanish missionaries to
be a reference to Christian traditions.

_Ca tip u chemob_, when the ships were rocking; _tipil_ represents the
slipping and sliding movement of a partially submerged or hidden body;
thus the beating of the heart and the pulse is _tipilac_. _Ca yumtah
banderas ob_, when the banners waved; _yumtah_ is to swing to and fro as
a hamack or a flag. _Piixtahob_, from _pixitah_, to unreel or reel off
yarn, etc., from a spindle. I suppose it refers to letting go the
anchor.

The derivation of the name Yucatan here given is interesting, for
several reasons. In the first place, it makes it evident that Pech did
not believe it was an abbreviation of Yucalpeten (see ante, page 255).
Again, although it has very often been stated that the name arose from a
misunderstanding of some native words by the Spaniards, there has been
no uniformity of opinion as to what these words were. Several of the
phrases suggested have been such as have no meaning in the Maya tongue;
(see full discussions of the question in Eligio Ancona, _Historia de
Yucatan_, Vol. I, pp. 219, 220, and Crescencio Carrillo, _Historia
Antigua de Yucatan_, cap. V.) As given by Pech it is perfectly
intelligible and good Maya. Without syncope it would be "_Matan ca ubah
a than_" shortened to "_Ma c'ubah than_,[TN-36] "We do not understand
your speech." Pech is in error, however, in supposing that the name
arose on the arrival of Montejo; it was in use immediately after the
expedition of Cordova (1517), and if Bernal Diaz was correct in his
recollection, was applied to the land by the Indians Cordova brought
back to Cuba with him from the Bay of Campeachy. (See Bernal Diaz,
_Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de Nueva España_, cap. VII.)

34. This is no doubt the same occurrence which is described at
considerable length by Cogolludo, _Hist. de Yucatan_, Lib. III, cap. VI.
But the details differ very much and the names of the messengers and the
chief to whom they were sent are not identical. I believe this
discrepancy can be explained, but it would extend this note too far to
go into the subject here. The word _yacatunzabin_, which Avila renders
"en dicha cueva," seems a compound of _y_, _actun_, _zabin_. The last is
the name of the weasel; _actun_ means both a cave and a stone house. By
some it is supposed to be a compound of _ac_, tortoise, and _tun_,
stone, a cave resembling a hollow tortoise shell.

35. _Yoklal maix u lukul yol nacomob_, "porque no se cansaban los
capitanes" (Avila).

36. Pech adds a list of the names of Conquistadores which I have not
inserted, as it is less complete than that found in Cogolludo.

39. _Ma u manbal cuntahbalob u cħinal_; Avila translates this "that they
shall not destroy"; but the word _cuntahbal_, from _cun_, _cumtah_,
means that which is to be enchanted, and _cħinal_ is the throwing of
stones. I suppose, therefore, it refers to some act of shamanism the
design of which was to injure a neighbor.


FOOTNOTES:

[190-1] See his _Informe acerca de las Ruinas de Mayapan y de Uxmal_

[191-1] "<sc>Chijcxulub</sc>: poner los cuernos; hacer cabron á uno: _u chiicah
bin u xulub u lak_; diz que pusó los cuernos á su compañero ô proximo;
que se aprobechó de su muger ô manceba," _Diccionario de Motul, MS._

[194-1] Tekom.

[195-1] nacon Cupul.

[196-1] matanon.

[196-2] Tipikal.

[198-1] hauah.

[201-1] cochlahal.

[201-2] yokolcab.

[202-1] tzolic.

[202-2] xanhi.

[202-3] utznac.

[203-1] tubalob.

[204-1] yotochob nacon.

[204-2] tiobi.

[206-1] aheɔil.

[206-2] tiihil.

[206-3] chunbez.

[207-1] chunbez.

[207-2] chabil.

[208-1] ociha.

[208-2] ezabil.

[208-3] ɔiboltahob.

[209-1] mulbaobe.

[210-1] ocol cah.

[210-2] panob.

[211-1] a--ciil--ex.

[211-2] yilahob.

[211-3] tzimin.

[211-4] ahactunob.

[211-5] actunzabin.

[212-1] ɔa uinalalob.

[212-2] chiic.

[213-1] tzoloc.

[214-1] beltahob.




VOCABULARY.


A

Ac, n. A turtle; a turtle shell.

Actun, n. (From _ac_, turtle shell, _tun_, stone.) A cave; a stone
house.

Ah, A prefix signifying possession or action; also sign of masculine.
See pp. 28, 57.

Ahau, n. (From _ah_, prefix, and _u_, collar? See p. 57.) A ruler,
chief, king; a period of time.

Ahbalcab, n. The coming dawn. "Quiere amanescer." _Dicc. Motul._

Ahez, n. (From _ah_, prefix, _ezah_, to show, to feign.) A sorcerer,
magician.

Ahkin, n. (From _ah_, and _kin_, the sun, day, etc.) A priest.

Ahkulel, n. (From _ah_ and _kulel_, to arrange business, etc.) A
lieutenant, deputy. pp. 27, 247.

Ahoni, n. Well-dressed persons. p. 173.

Ahpul, n[TN-37] One who carries or bears.

Ahpulul, n. He or that which is carried or brought.

Ahtepal, n. A ruler, governor.

Ahtohil, n. A lover of justice; a righteous man.

Ahuitzil, n. Mountaineers. p. 131.

Ak, n. Osiers, willow branches. "Ramo de miembre." Pio Perez. _Dicc._

Akab, n. Night, the night time.

Al, n. Son or daughter of a woman. _Yal_, her son.

Alah, v[TN-38] pres. _alic_, fut. _alab_. To speak, say, tell, order.

Alau, A numeral. p. 46.

Anahte.[TN-39] n. A book. p. 64.

Atan, n. Wife.

Auat, v. aor. _autah_, fut. _auté_. To shout, to sing. "Dar gritos."


B

Bahun, adv. How much.

Bak, n.
  1. Meat, flesh; the private parts.
  2. The number 400.
  3. The turn of a rope around anything.
  4. In composition, an intensive particle, or conveys the idea of
     enveloping with cords.

Bal _or_ Baal, n. Thing, business, matter.

Balam, n. A tiger; a priest. p. 69.

Baalcah, n. The town and its inhabitants; the world. "El mundo con los
que en el viven." _Dicc. Motul._

Ban _or_ Banban, adv. Much, too much.

Batab, n. Chief, ruler. See p. 26.

Be _or_ Bel, n. A path, a road; a business; condition; history.

Beltah _or_ Beel _or_ Betah, v. aor. _tah_, fut. _té_. To do, to make.

Binel, v. irreg. aor. _bini_, fut. _binxic_. To go.

Bolon, Nine.

Botah, v. To pay.

Buc, n. Covering, clothing.

Buluc, Ten.

Buul, n. A broad bean.


C

Ca, adv. Then, when.
  conj. And.
  pron. We.
  adj. Two.

Caan, n. The sky, the heavens.

Cab, n.
  1. Land, earth. p. 106.
  2. Honey; a hive.

Cacab, n. A town and the land belonging to it; a township, commune.

Cah, n. A town, village.

Cah, part. A suffix and sign of the present and imperfect tenses, p. 29.

Cahal, n. A town, village.
  v. To reside, live in or at.

Cahtal, v. aor. _cahlahi_, f. _calac_. To live, dwell, reside.

Cal, n. Throat, neck; voice; in compos. an intensive particle.

Calab, A numeral. p. 45.

Cambezah, v. To teach, to instruct.

Can, n.
  1. Conversation, talk.
  2. The generic name for serpents.
  3. The number four.
  4. A gift or present.

Can, v. aor. _tah_, fut. _té_. To converse, to tell stories. aor. _ah_,
fut. é[TN-40]. To teach, to impart information; to give another a
contagious disease.

Can, part. in compos. Strongly, powerfully, as _cankax_, to tie very
firmly.

Canantah, v. To watch, to guard over.

Canlaahal, v. To learn about.

Caputzihil, n. Baptism (_ca_, twice, _zihil_, to be born; an ancient
word; see Landa, _Relacion_, p. 144).

Catac, conj. And; used to connect numerals. p. 49.

Caten, adv. The second time. _Tu caten_, for the second time. (From
_ca_, _two_.)

Catul, adv. Two. _Tu catulli_, both, the two.

Caua, conj. And, then.

Cax, n. A fowl, a hen.

Caxan, v. aor. _tah_, fut. _té_. To seek, to find, to hunt for.

Caxtun, adv. Then, be it so, thus.

Ceh, n. A deer.

Cen, v. irreg. aor. _cihi_, fut. _ciac_. To say, to tell.

Ci, Cici, part. These prefixes mean pleasant, agreeable; originally,
what is pleasant to taste.

Cibah, v. aor. _cibhi_, fut. _cibic_. To wish, to permit, to dare. _U
cibah ua a yum._ Did your father permit it?

Cicithan, n. (From _cici_, pleasant, _than_, words.) Words of love or
blessing.

Ciciol, n. (From _cici_ and _ol_.) Joy, pleasure, peace, happiness.

Cii, n. The pulque liquor. See p. 22.

Cill, n. Delight, pleasure.

Cilich, adj. Saintly, holy.

Cob, v. 3d pl. pres. indic. of _cen_.[TN-41]

Cimil, v. To die.

Coch, in comp. Conveys the notion of extending or broadening.

Cochhal _or_ Cochlahal, v. To make broad, to extend, to spread out.

Cuch, n.
  1. Position, place.
  2. Burden, load; _met_. sin.
  3. Goods, possessions, treasures.

Cuch, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_.
  1. To carry, to bear along.
  2. To govern a town or state.

Cuchcabal, n. A province, region; the family, people or subjects of one
ruler.

Cuchhab, n. The year-bearer or Dominical sign. p. 52.

Cuchi. Sign of past tense. p. 29.

Cuchul, n. The family or retainers of one person. "La familia ó gente
que uno tiene en su casa." _Dicc. Motul._

Cul, n. A vase or cup.

Culcinah, v. To appoint, to promote, to establish; _culcintahaan_,
appointed or promoted to an office or dignity.

Cultal _or_ Cutal, v. aor. _culhi_, fut. _culac_. To sit down, remain,
be present, be at home, etc.

Culul _or_ Cuulul _or_ Culicil, v. To rest or stop; to reside, to settle
down.

Cum _or_ Cuum, n. A vase, jar.

Cumcintah, v. To prepare for use, to put in order. Probably a form of
_culcinah_.

Cumlaahaal, v. To stop, to check.

Cumtal, v. aor. _lahi_, fut. _ac_. To set up, to put in a place.

Cun _or_ Cunah _or_ Cunal, n. Enchantment, sorcery, conjury. _Au ohel
ua_ u _cunal cħuplal?_ Do you know the conjury of a woman? _Dicc. Motul_
(_i. e._, to make her submit to the will of a man).

Cuntabal, Passive supine; from _cunah_, to conjure.

Cutz, n. The wild turkey,[TN-42]


Ch.

Chac, n. Water, rain, a giant, a god.
  adj. red. In comp. much or very.

Chacaan, n. Something plain, open, visible.

Chacanhal, v. To become visible, to show itself.

Chahal, v. To lose strength, to weaken.

Chakan, n. A savanna. p. 125.

Chapahal, v. To sicken.

Chayanil, n. The rest, the remainder.

Che, n. A tree; wood; _adj._[TN-43] wooden.

Chem, n. A boat, a ship.

Chen, adv. Solely, only, merely.

Chenbel, adv. Vainly, fruitlessly.

Chi, n. The mouth; a border, limit, edge; a bite, as _u chi pek_, the
bite of a dog.
  verb, to bite, to eat.

Chicilbezah, v. To set landmarks, to point out.

Chichcunah, v. To strengthen, to fortify.

Chichcunahthan, v. To support another's words, to agree with, to act in
concert with. p. 107.

Chicul, n. A sign, mark, token.

Chikin, n. The West.

Chicpahal, v. aor. _pahi_, fut. _pahac_. To find, to discover, to
recover that which is lost; "parecer lo perdido." Pio Perez, _Dicc._

Chilan, n. An interpreter, p. 69.

Chin, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To stone, to throw stones at.

Chin, adj. A term of endearment.

Chinchin, v. To incline, lean over, be out of line.

Choy, n. A bucket; _choyche_, a wooden bucket.

Chuuc _or_ Chuc, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To grasp, seize, to take
possession of.

Chucan, n. Completeness, sufficiency, abundance.

Chuccabil, n. A province, district.

Chul, n. A flute.

Chulub, n. Rain water; reservoirs.

Chun, n. Foundation; trunk (of a tree); beginning; cause.

Chunbezah, v. To cause, to occasion, to begin.

Chunthan, n. (From _chun_, first, _than_; speech, he who speaks first.)
A principal, a presiding officer.


Cħ

Cħaa, _or_ Cħtaab, v. aor. _cħaah_, fut. _chaé_.
  1. To take, to carry; to carry off; hence to kill.
  2. To recover that which is lost.

Cħahucil or[TN-44] Cħuhucil, n. Sweets.

Cħeen, n. Lowland; well. pp. 33, 125.

Cħibal, n. Lineage, generation.

Cħuplal, n. Woman, girl.

Cħuytab, v. To hang.


E

Et, A particle indicating similitude. As a verb, to hold alike in the
two hands. Hence,
  _eta_, friend;
  _etel_, companion;
  _etan_, wife;
  _etcah_, fellow townsman;
  _yetel_, and, with, etc.

Ez, n. Enchanter, sorcerer.

Ezah, v. To show, to make public; to imitate, feign.
  _Ezabil_, what is to be or should be shown or published.


H

Haa, n. Water.

Haab, n. Year. p. 50.

Haban, n. Branch, twig. p. 126.

Hach, adv. Much, very.

Hahal, adj. and adv. True, truly.

Halach, adj, and n. True, truth;
  _halach than_, an oath;
  _halach uinic_. p. 26.

Halal, n. The cane.

Hanal, v. aor. _hani_, fut. _hanac_. To eat.

Haual, v. aor. _haui_, fut. _hauac_. To cease, to stop.

Hayal, v. To level with the ground, to destroy; from _hay_, thin, flat;
hence
  _hayalcab_, the final end and destruction of the world.

Heɔ _or_ Eɔ, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To fix firmly, to establish, to
found; to select a site.

Heɔcab, v. To fix or establish promptly; "poner ó afirmar ó asentar de
presto alguna cosa que quede ferme." _Dicc. Motul._

Hicħcal, v. To tie up by the neck, to hang.

Hiɔ _or_ Hiɔil, n. The close or last of the week, month, or year, as _u
hiɔil buluc ahau katun_, the last day of the eleventh Ahau katun.
_Chilan Balam._

Ho, adj. Five.

Hokol, v. aor. _hoki_. To set out for, to go out from; of seeds, to
sprout; of the beard, etc., to begin to grow.

Hokzahuba, v. To take oneself away from.

Hol, n. The end of anything, hence the door of a house, the gate of a
town, the mouth of a bag or jar, a hole, an aperture;
  verb, sensu obscœno, to seduce a girl, to penetrate her. _Dicc. Motul._

Holcan, n. A warrior;
  adj. brave, valiant.

Holhaa, n. A seaport. See _haa_.

Holpay, n. A seaport. See _pay_.

Holpop, n. A chieftain (from _hol_ and _pop_, mat); "he who is at the
end or head of the mat."

Hom, n. A trumpet.

Hoppol, v. To begin.

Hun, adj. One.

Hunakbu, n. The one God.

Hunkul, adv. Once and forever, really, permanently.

Hunmol, adj. United together, congregated in one place[TN-45]

Hunten, adv. On one occasion, at one time.

Huun, n. A book. p. 63.


I.

Ich, n.
  1. Face; eyes; twins; surface.
  2. Fruit; longing; color.

Ich, prep. In, into, within.

Ilah v. aor. _ilah_, fut. _ilé_.[TN-46] or _ilab_. To see, to look at, to
visit, to test, to try.

Ix, fem. prefix. See page 28;
  conj. and also n. urine.

Ixim, n. Maize.

Ixmehen, n. A daughter.


K.

Kaan, n. A measure. p. 27.

Kab, n. The hand, the arm.

Kaba, n. A name. See p. 26.

Kabanzah, v. To give a name.

Kah, n. Pinole, meal of roasted maize, used for stirring in water
to drink.

Kahal, v. To remember, recall.

Kahlay, n. Memory, memorial, record.

Kak, n. Fire; also a febrile disease.

Kaknab, n. The sea, the ocean.

Kal, n. A score. p. 39;
  verb, to imprison.

Kam _or_ Kamah, v. To accept, receive; to take possession of.

Kan, adj. Yellow.
  n. The name of the first day of the Maya month.

Kat, v. To wish, to desire. To ask, to ask for, to inquire.

Katun, n. A body of warriors; a period of time. p. 58.

Kax, n. Forest, woods.

Kaxah, v. To join, unite, tie together.

Kay _or_ Kayah, v. To sing.

Keban, n. Sin, evil.

Kebanthan, v. To plot evil, to calumniate; to commit treason;
"kebanthanil, traicion." _Dicc. Motul._

Kilacale, n. Ancestors.

Kin, n. The sun; a day; time.

Kinchil. A numeral. p. 46.

Koch _or_ Kooch, v. To carry on the shoulders as a burden,
hence, _fig._ n. obligation, fault, sickness.

Kohan, n. Sickness.

Ku, n. God, divinity.

Kubulte, n. Delivery, deposit.

Kuchul, v. aor. _kuchi_, fut. _kuchuc_. To arrive, to come to.

Kul, in comp. much, very; _kulvinic_. pp. 133, 164.

Kuna, n. (From _ku_, god, _na_, house). A temple, a church.

Kuuch, n. Cotton threads.

Kuxil, n. Aversion, disgust, annoyance;
  verb, to feel disgust at.

Kuyan, adj. Consecrated to God, holy.


L

Lahal, v. To finish, to end.

Lahca. Twelve.

Lahun. Ten. p. 38.

Lai _or_ Lay, rel. and dem. pron. This, that, these, those, which, what,
etc.

Lak, n. Companion, neighbor.

Lic _or_ Licil, rel. In which, by which.

Likil, v. To rise, to raise; as _likil katun_, to begin war.

Likin _or_ Lakin, n. The East.

Likul, prep. From, out of.

Likzah, v. To lift up, to raise; _likzahuba_, to raise oneself.

Loh, v. To redeem, to set at liberty.

Lohil, n. The Redeemer, the Saviour.

Lukanil, n. That which is set apart or separated.

Lukul, v. aor. _luki_, fut. _lukuc_. To leave a place, to depart from,
go out of.

Lukzah, v. To free, to separate from; _lukzahuba_, to quit, to abstain
from.


M

Ma, adv. No, not. From this are the negatives, _matan_, not, emphatic;
_mato_, _matac_, _maina_, not even; _maix_, _matla_, neither; _mamac_,
no one; _manan_, without, etc.

Mac, rel. pron. Who.

Maccah, v. To obstruct, close up roads, etc.
  Hence _macan_ p. p. p. that which is obstructed.

Mach, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To take with the hand, to hold in the
hand.

Mactzil, adj. Marvelous, miraculous; n. a miracle, an act of Providence.
(From _mac_, most, and _tzibil_, to be obeyed or reverenced.)

Mak, v. To eat soft things, to eat without chewing.

Mal _or_ Malel, v. aor. _mani_, fut. _manac_. To pass.

Manak, n. A sign or mark.

Manal, adv. Too much, in excess.

Manbal, adv. Nothing.

Mat, v. To receive, obtain.

Maya, n. Derivation of. p. 16.

Mayacimil, n. The pestilence. p. 132.

Mazcab, n. A prison, gaol.

Mazeual, n. Vassal, servant. Nahuatl, _maceualli_.

Mehen, n. A son.

Mek, n. An armful, hence

Mektantah, _or_ Mektanma, v. To hold in one's power, to rule, govern.

Mektancah, n. Jurisdiction, municipality.

Mektanmail, n. A ruler, governor.

Mentah, v. To make, manufacture.

Menyah, v. To work, serve.
  n. Work, service.

Met, n. A wheel. p. 86.

Mex _or_ Meex, n. The beard.

Meyah, v. To serve, to labor for one.

Minantal, v. p. p. minaan.[TN-47] To lack, to be absent or wanting, not
to have.

Molcintah, v. To gather together, join, unite.

Moltah, v. To gather around.

Mothtal, v. To humble, to submit.

Muk, n. Fortitude, bravery.

Muktan, v. To suffer with fortitude.

Mul _or_ Mol, part. in comp. Jointly, in common.

Mulba, v. To congregate, to come together.

Multepal, v. To rule or govern jointly. p. 131.

Muz, v. To cut.


N

Na, n. A house, not designating whose.

Naat, v. To know, understand.

Nacal, v. To ascend. p. 28.

Nachi, adv. Far off, distant.

Nacpalancal, v. To grope, to feel one's way.

Nah, v. To suit, wish, desire; _nahuba_, to suit, etc., for oneself.

Nak, n. The abdomen, belly, the end; verb. to end, finish; to join, to
stick; _tu nak_, at the end, near, close to.

Nakal, v. To approach, to join on.

Nant, v. See _Naat_.

Noh, adj. Great, large.

Nohkakil, n. Smallpox. p. 132.

Nohoch, adj. Great, large.

Nohol, n. The South.

Nuc, adj. Great, large.

Nuc, v. To answer;
  n. an answer.

Nuctah, v. To understand, perceive.

Nucté, adj. Old, ancient; _nucteel_, the elders and leading men of a
town.

Nucul, n. Signification, meaning; manner, form, figure.

Numya, n. Toil, misery, unhappiness.

Nucahthan, v. To reply, to answer.

Nupthan, n. Companion, associate.


O

Oc, n. The foot; _yooc_ his foot, their feet.

Oca _or_ Ochaa _or_ Ocolha, (From v. _ocol_, to enter, _haa_, water,) To
baptize.

Ocnakuchil, n. A pestilence. p. 151.

Ocol, v. aor. _oci_, fut. _ococ_. To enter; also _sensu obscœno_.

Ohel, v. aor. _tah_, fut. _té_. To know, to recognize.

Ol, n. Mind, intention, will.

Olah, v. To wish, to desire;
  n. will, goodwill, wish.

On, pron. We.

Ontkin, adv. For a long time.

Op _or_ Oop, n. The anona, custard apple.

Otoch, n. House, dwelling, denoting whose. p. 106.

Ox, adv. Three; _oxlahun_, thirteen. p. 130.


P

Pa _or_ Paa, n. A walled town, stronghold, fortress. p. 163.

Pa, v. To break, break down, destroy.

Pach, To take possession of, to select a place.

Pach, n. The back of the shoulders; the outer or back part; hence, the
last or end of anything; _tu pach_, behind, after.

Pachal, adv. Afterwards, late.

Paiche, n. A mark, a line.

Pak _or_ Pakil, n. A wall of stone, verb, aor. _ah_, fut. é.[TN-48] To
found, build, sow, plant; hence

Pakal, n. A building, founding, etc.

Pakte _or_ Pakteil, adv. All together, in all.

Palil, n. A servant, man-servant.

Pan, n. Standard, banner.

Patan, n. Tribute, tax; from _paatah_, to watch, to guard.

Patcunah, v. To declare, set forth, explain;
  n. an explanation, etc.

Paxal _or_ Paaxal, v. aor. _xi_, fut. _xac_. To forsake, abandon,
desert, depopulate; "desamparar y despoblar pueblo." _Dicc. Motul._

Pay, n. The sea-coast.

Pay, v. aor. _tah_, fut. _té_. To draw or call toward one, hence,
_payal_, to be called or summoned.

Paybe, n. (From _pay_, and _be_, a road). A guide;
  hence, adv., first, before.

Pek, n. A dog.

Pet, n. A circle, wheel.

Peten, n. An island, country, province. p. 122.

Pic. A numeral. p. 45.

Pix _or_ Piixtah, v. To unwind, to cast anchor.

Pixan, n. Soul; happiness;
  adj. happy.

Pol. n. Head; hair.

Puchtun, n. Fighting, quarreling.

Puczical, n. Heart; mind, will, soul.

Pul, v. To bring, to carry. _Ahpulul_, one who brings.


Pp

Ppatal, v. To remain, to stay.

Ppiz, n. A measure of grain, etc.

Ppoc, n. A hat.

Ppul _or_ Ppuul, n. An earthen jar.


T

Taab, n. Salt.

Tab, v. To tie together; hence

Tabal, n. Relationship; anything attached to or dependent on another.

Tabzah, v. To deceive, to delude, to tie.

Tah, adv. Whence, whither, thence, to, unto.
  pron. For us, for our part.

Takal, v. To stick to; to add to, to increase.

Tal, prep. From; _tii tal en_, I am from there. _Dicc. San Francisco._

Tal, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To touch, to begin to take; to make use of.

Talel, v. aor. _tali_, fut. _talae_ or _tae_. To come, to go.

Tamuk, adv. While, when.

Tan, n. The breast; hence, the middle of anything; as _tan cah_, the
middle of the town. p. 132.

Tan, postposition. Toward, as _lakintan_, toward the East.

Tancabal, n. The premises of a house; a house and its grounds.

Tancoch, n. A half (from _tan_, and _cochil_, the width, the size of a
thing).

Tec, adv. Quickly, suddenly.

Tem _or_ Temah, v. To satisfy, please.

Ten, pron. I. _Ten c en_, I who am I.

Tepal, v. To rule, govern.

Than, n. Word, speech.

Thun, n. A drop, a spot, a dot.

Ti, prep. To, by, for; sign of dative and ablative.

Tiihil, v. To happen there, to take place there.

Tipp, v. To exceed in size; to go forth from; as _tippan kin_, the sun
having appeared.

Toc _or_ Tooc, v. aor. _tocah_, fut. _é_, To burn.

Toch, adj. Severe, firm, rough.

Tocoyna, n. A deserted house or field; "solar yermo." _Dicc. Motul._

Toh, adj. Just, righteous; _ahtohil_, a magistrate.

Tohyol, adj. Healthy, well (from _toh_, _ol_).

Tox, v. To pour out; _tox haa ti pol_, to pour water on the head,
_i. e._, to baptize. _Dicc. Motul._ _Toxol_, the person baptized; also a
distribution or outpouring, as _toxol cahob_, a distribution of towns to
different rulers.

Tul, adj. Full, abounding. p. 39.
  verb. To fill to overflowing, to rise (of the tide).
  For _tutul_ see p. 109.

Tulpach, v. To go back, to return.

Tulum, n. A wall, walled town. p. 163.

Tumen, prep. For, by reason of, because of.

Tun, n. A stone.
  A euphonic particle. p. 124.

Tux _or_ Tuux, adv. Where, in what part or place.

Tuzebal, adv. Promptly.

Tuzinil, adv. All, in all parts.

Tzac, v. To seek, to follow.

Tzen, n. Food, sustenance; hence,

Tzentah, To give food to.

Tzicil, v. To obey, to serve.

Tzimin, n. A horse.

Tzol, n. A string, thread; hence, verb, to arrange on a string, to put
in order, to adjust; _tzolan_, an arrangement, series, order.

Tzuc, n. A part, division. p. 54.

Tzucub, n. A province.


U

U, n. The moon; a month; menstrual period; a string of beads, a collar;
rosary.
  pron. His, her, its, their.
  Also a euphonic particle before vowels.

Uaatal, v. To set up, erect.

Uabic, adv. How, in what manner.

Uac, Six.

Uacchahal, v. To emerge with force. p. 185.

Uacuntah, v. To set on end, to put in place; to designate, appoint;
_uacuntahbal_, the putting in place, etc.

Uah, n. Tortilla, bread; _uahal uahob_. p. 129.

Uahil, n. Banquet; guest.

Ualac, adv. While, meanwhile.

Ualkahal, v. To turn oneself, to return.

Uaxac, Eight.

Uay _or_ Uai, adv. Here, in this place.

Uazaklom, n. A return, p. 86.

Ubah, v. To hear, understand.

Uchebal, conj. In order that.

Uchul, v. aor. _uchi_, fut. _uchuc_. To happen, to occur, take place,
come to pass.

Uinalal, n. Labor, work.

Uinbail, n. Image, figure.

Uinic, n. Man; a measure, p. 27.

Uitz, n. A mountain, a hill. p. 131.

Ulul, v. To arrive, return.

Ulum, n. A bird, a pheasant.

Uooh, v. To write, p. 63.

Utial, prep. For, on account of.

Utz, adj. Good; _utzil_, the good, the well-being.

Utzcinah, v. To make better, to perfect; to compose a speech or essay;
to set in order.

Utzuac, adv. Now, be it now.

Uuc. Seven.

Uuɔ, n. A folding, doubling; a line of warriors.


X

Xachetah, v. To seek, to procure.

Xamach, n. A large pot or jar.

Xaman, n. The North.

Xan, n. Straw;
  conj. also adv. slowly.

Xantal, v. aor. _xanhi_ fut. _xanac_. To stay behind, to remain.

Xenhi, v. To vomit.

Xic, v. To split, to divide.

Xicin, n. The ear, the hearing.

Ximbal, v. to journey, to pass.

Xiu, n. Grass, herbage, name of a noble family. p. 109.

Xma, prep. Without.

Xocol, v. To count, to read.

Xotlahal, v. To cut.

Xul, n. End, limit;
  v. to end, also _xulul_.


Y

Ya, n.
  1. Love
  2. Pain, wound, sickness.
  3. Difficulty.
  4. A shoe.

Yaab, adj. Much, abundant: _yaabil_, abundance, multitude.

Yacunah, v. To love.

Yah _or_ Yaah, n. Severe sickness.

Yala, The rest, remainder.

Yalan, prep. Under, beneath.

Yan _or_ Yanhal, v. To have, to be, to stand.

Yax, adv. First, freshly;
  adj. green, young.

Yaxchun, n. The beginning, cause.

Yetel, conj. And, with, a compound of _u etel_, his or its companion,
usually abbreviated _to[TN-49] y_.

Yib, n. A bean.

Yic, n. Red peppers.

Yok, prep. On, over, in front of.

Yoklal, prep. By reason of, because of.

Yokolcab, adv. On the earth, in the world.

Yol, n. Mind, spirit.

Yxma, prep. Without, =_xma_.[TN-50]

Yub, n. Cloak, coat.

Yum, n. Father; lord; ruler; head of a family.

Yum _or_ Yumtah, v. To wave, to move to and fro.


Z

Zabin, n. A weasel.

Zah _or_ Zahal _or_ Zahacil, n. Fear, terror; verb, to fear.

Zat, v. aor. _ah_, fut. _é_. To lose.

Zi, n. Wood.

Zihnal, n. Birth, a native.

Zil _or_ Ziil, v. To give, to present;
  n. gifts.

Zinah, v. To cut wood.

Zuhuy, n. A virgin.

Zulbil-taab, n. Purified salt, from _zul_, to soak.

Zut, v. To return; _tu zut pach_, back again, over again.


Ɔ

Ɔa v. aor. _ɔaah_, fut. _ɔaé_ or _ɔaab_. To give; _ɔabal_, past part.
pas. that which is to be given.

Ɔa, v. To avail, to be of advantage.

Ɔaleb, n. A seal, mould, press.

Ɔan, v. To devastate, ruin.

Ɔaɔ, v. To suck; _ɔaɔopob_, suckers of anonas, a name given to the
Spaniards.

Ɔiboltah, v. To desire, wish for.

Ɔib _or_ Ɔibah, v. To write.

Ɔicil, n. Bravery; encouragement.

Ɔilibal, n. A register, record.

Ɔoc, n. The end, the last.
  v. To happen, to occur; to tear down.
  adv. Already.

Ɔoocol, v. To end, finish.

Ɔuɔ, v. To kiss, to suck.

Ɔuunɔucil, adj. Made of mud, or plastered.

Ɔul, n. A foreigner, stranger. p. 131.

Ɔunul, v. To make a beginning.

Ɔuɔucinzah, v. To act mildly and kindly; from _ɔuɔ_, to kiss, to suck.




  Transcriber's Note

  The following errors were corrected:

  Page Error
  196  Both footnotes on this page were numbered 1. The second was changed
       to number 2.

  The following misspellings and typographical errors were maintained.

  Page  Error
  TN-1   24   terrestial should read terrestrial
  TN-2   24, fn. 2   Piéces should read Pièces
  TN-3   25   Numbers 13 to 19 are one higher than they should be
  TN-4   46, fn. 1   _Calepino en Lengua Cakchiquel por Fray_ Francisco de
              Varea should read _Calepino en Lengua Cakchiquel_ por Fray
              Francisco de Varea
  TN-5   53   40th year should read 40th year.
  TN-6   54, fn. 1   años.' should read años."
  TN-7   57   batallion should read battalion
  TN-8   58, fn. 1   Lengva should read Lengua
  TN-9   67, fn. 1   Nvestra should read Nuestra
  TN-10  87   (I. II, III.) should read (I, II, III.)
  TN-11  87   well dressed" should read "well dressed"
  TN-12  111  p 10 should read p. 10
  TN-13  111  cap, XXIX, should read cap. XXIX,
  TN-14  111  p 12 should read p. 12
  TN-15  124  northen should read northern
  TN-16  128  qui should read que
  TN-17  128  established himself should read "established himself
  TN-18  131  MS). should read MS.).
  TN-19  132  cap. VI), should read cap. VI).
  TN-20  138  Uac ahau should read Uac ahau.
  TN-21  142  Lahun ahau, should read Lahun ahau.
  TN-22  157  Uuc ahau, should read Uuc ahau.
  TN-23  183  Usumaciuta should read Usumacinta
  TN-24  190  Abbe Brasséur should read Abbé Brasseur
  TN-25  198  yahaubiI should read yahaubil
  TN-26  238  branches should read branches,
  TN-27  244  miscontrued should read misconstrued
  TN-28  247  in Yucatan, should read in Yucatan.
  TN-29  247  MS.) should read MS.).
  TN-30  252  26. should read 20.
  TN-31  252  MS.) should read MS.).
  TN-32  254  Bienvanida should read Bienvenida
  TN-33  257  MS.) should read MS.).
  TN-34  257  possibly should read possible
  TN-35  257  I Kan should read 1 Kan
  TN-36  258  "_Ma c'ubah than_ should read "_Ma c'ubah than_"
  TN-37  261  Ahpul, n should read Ahpul, n.
  TN-38  261  Alah, v should read Alah, v.
  TN-39  261  Anante. should read Anante,
  TN-40  263  fut. é should read fut. _é_
  TN-41  263  Cob is out of alphabetical order
  TN-42  264  wild turkey, should read wild turkey.
  TN-43  265  _adj._ should not be italicized
  TN-44  266  Cħahucil or Cħuhucil should read Cħahucil _or_ Cħuhucil
  TN-45  267  one place should read one place.
  TN-46  267  _ilé_. should read _ilé_,
  TN-47  270  minaan should read _minaan_
  TN-48  272  fut. é should read fut. _é_
  TN-49  277  _to y_ should read to _y_
  TN-50  278  Yxma is out of alphabetical order

  Inconsistent spelling:

  Abbe / Abbé
  Cuculcan / Cuculcàn
  Pocomams / Pokomams
  Pocomchis / Pokomchis
  Puczical / Puczikal

  Other inconsistencies:

  i.e. / i. e.

  Accents on words in foreign languages are inconsistently used.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maya Chronicles, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAYA CHRONICLES ***

***** This file should be named 20205-0.txt or 20205-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/2/0/20205/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
