The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Colonel at Boarding-School, by 
Annie Fellows Johnston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Little Colonel at Boarding-School

Author: Annie Fellows Johnston

Illustrator: Etheldred B. Barry

Release Date: February 21, 2012 [EBook #38939]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE COLONEL AT BOARDING SCHOOL ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)








Transcriber's Note: Bold text is surrounded by =equal signs= and italic
text is shown by _underscores_.


[Illustration: Cover]




THE LITTLE COLONEL AT

(Trade Mark)

BOARDING-SCHOOL




Works of

ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON

    The Little Colonel Series
    (_Trade Mark, Reg. U. S. Pat. Of._)
    Each one vol., large 12mo, cloth, illustrated

    The Little Colonel Stories                         $1.50
      (Containing in one volume the three stories, "The
      Little Colonel," "The Giant Scissors," and
      "Two Little Knights of Kentucky.")
    The Little Colonel's House Party                    1.50
    The Little Colonel's Holidays                       1.50
    The Little Colonel's Hero                           1.50
    The Little Colonel at Boarding-School               1.50
    The Little Colonel in Arizona                       1.50
    The Little Colonel's Christmas Vacation             1.50
    The Little Colonel: Maid of Honor                   1.50
    The Little Colonel's Knight Comes Riding            1.50
      The above 9 vols., _boxed_                       13.50
    _In Preparation_--A New Little Colonel Book         1.50

    The Little Colonel Good Times Book                  1.50


Illustrated Holiday Editions

Each one vol., small quarto, cloth, illustrated, and printed in colour

    The Little Colonel                                 $1.25
    The Giant Scissors                                  1.25
    Two Little Knights of Kentucky                      1.25
    Big Brother                                         1.25


Cosy Corner Series

Each one vol., thin 12mo, cloth, illustrated

    The Little Colonel                                  $.50
    The Giant Scissors                                   .50
    Two Little Knights of Kentucky                       .50
    Big Brother                                          .50
    Ole Mammy's Torment                                  .50
    The Story of Dago                                    .50
    Cicely                                               .50
    Aunt 'Liza's Hero                                    .50
    The Quilt that Jack Built                            .50
    Flip's "Islands of Providence"                       .50
    Mildred's Inheritance                                .50


Other Books

    Joel: A Boy of Galilee                             $1.50
    In the Desert of Waiting                             .50
    The Three Weavers                                    .50
    Keeping Tryst                                        .50
    The Legend of the Bleeding Heart                     .50
    Asa Holmes                                          1.00
    Songs Ysame (Poems, with Albion Fellows Bacon)      1.00


    L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    200 Summer Street               Boston, Mass.

[Illustration: "SHE STOOD THERE ON THE PLATFORM, WAVING HER
HANDKERCHIEF."

    (_See page 300_)]






The Little Colonel at Boarding-School

By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON Author of "The Little Colonel Series," "Big
Brother," "Ole Mammy's Torment," "Asa Holmes," etc.

Illustrated by ETHELDRED B. BARRY

    "_This learned I from the shadow of a tree,
     Which to and fro did sway upon a wall,
     Our shadow selves--our influence--may fall
     Where we can never be._"

[Illustration]

    BOSTON * L. C. PAGE
    & COMPANY * PUBLISHERS




    _Copyright, 1903_
    BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    (INCORPORATED)

    _All rights reserved_


    Published, July, 1903


    Thirteenth Impression, March, 1909




    TO
    All the Girls
    WHO, LIKE THE LITTLE COLONEL,
    ARE
    "STANDING WITH RELUCTANT FEET
    WHERE THE BROOK AND RIVER MEET,
    WOMANHOOD AND CHILDHOOD SWEET."




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                           PAGE
       I. OFF TO BOARDING-SCHOOL                        11
      II. A NEW FRIEND                                  27
     III. IDA'S SECRET                                  48
      IV. THE SHADOW CLUB                               69
       V. AT THE BEECHES                                89
      VI. UNINVITED GUESTS                             101
     VII. THE HALLOWE'EN MASQUERADE                    123
    VIII. THE PRINCESS OF THE PENDULUM                 139
      IX. ONE RAINY AFTERNOON                          158
       X. A PLOT                                       176
      XI. A WOLF IN SHEEP'S CLOTHING                   190
     XII. GHOST OR GIRL                                213
    XIII. THE SHADOW CLUB IN DISGRACE                  228
     XIV. THE THREE WEAVERS                            246
      XV. THANKSGIVING DAY                             275
     XVI. CHRISTMAS GREENS AND WATCH-NIGHT EMBERS      287




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                      PAGE
    "SHE STOOD THERE ON THE PLATFORM, WAVING HER
          HANDKERCHIEF" (_See page 300_)     _Frontispiece_

    "SHE TURNED HER WHITE FINGERS IN THE MOONLIGHT"     61

    "'THIS LITTLE KNAVE MUST BE MY PARTNER'"           130

    "SHE COULD HEAR EVERY WORD OF THE CONVERSATION"    167

    "HE HELD IT ASIDE FOR THEM BOTH TO PASS THROUGH"   199

    "MITTIE SAT UP IN BED, TOO STARTLED TO UTTER A
          SOUND"                                       220

    "'IT'S LIKE A BIT OF HOME TO SEE YOU AGAIN'"       283

    "MALCOLM, LEANING ON HIS GUN, STOOD WATCHING
          HER"                                         293




THE LITTLE COLONEL AT

(Trade Mark)

BOARDING-SCHOOL




CHAPTER I.

OFF TO BOARDING-SCHOOL


SOMETHING unusual was happening at Locust. Although it was early in
September, and the heat and dust of a Kentucky summer still lingered in
every corner of Lloydsboro Valley, the great house with its vine-covered
pillars was being hastily put in order for winter closing.

Rob Moore, swinging his tennis racket as he sauntered down the avenue
under the arching locust-trees, stopped short with a whistle of
surprise. The tennis net was down. He had come at the Little Colonel's
invitation for a farewell game, as they were both to start to school on
the morrow, she in the Valley, and he in town. He could not understand
the sudden removal of the net.

Then he noticed that every hammock and garden-chair had disappeared from
the lawn. Not even the usual trail of magazines and palm-leaf fans was
left on the grass, to show that somebody had been spending a comfortable
hour in the shade. Usually at this time in the afternoon there was a
flutter of ribbons and white dresses somewhere back among the trees; but
the place was deserted now. The wicker tea-table was gone from its
corner on the piazza. The rugs and cushions which had filled the cosy
corners behind the vines were packed away. The lace curtains were down
in the long drawing-room, and, peering through the windows which opened
to the floor, he saw a coloured man, busily shrouding the handsome old
furniture in linen covers.

"What's the matter, Alec?" asked Rob. "What has become of everybody?"

"Done had bad news from Ole Colonel las' night," answered the man.
"Walkah telegraphed from Hot Springs that ole Marse's rheumatiz is wuss,
and Mis' Sherman she's gwine down to stay with him awhile, an' the young
ladies is gwine to bo'din'-school. We all's fixin' to shet up the place
till Chris'mus."

Rob gave another long whistle, shrill and loud. "Boarding-school!" he
exclaimed. "Well, this is the biggest surprise out!"

His whistle was answered from the upper hall by a clear high trill,
which had been the Little Colonel's signal for him since the first
summer they had played together. Giving the answering call he stepped
inside the hall, and standing at the foot of the stairs peered up
anxiously at the laughing face leaning over the banister-rail above him.

"Come down, Lloyd, and tell me all about it," he demanded.

"I can't now," she replied, in an important tone, smiling tantalizingly
at the tall, broad-shouldered boy who shook his racket at her with a
threatening gesture. "Mothah has gone to town, and Mom Beck is packing
my trunk. I have to show her what things to put into it. Betty is down
there somewhere. She'll take the edge off yoah curiosity. Betty," she
called, catching sight of a pink dress whisking through the lower hall,
"don't tell Rob what school we are going to. Make him guess."

"All right," answered Betty, with a mischievous light in her brown eyes,
as she tossed back her curls and led the way out to the stone steps.
"We'll have to sit out here. All the hammocks and porch-chairs are
packed away in the attic," she explained, as she spread out the pink
skirt and leaned comfortably back against one of the white pillars.

"Seems to me you've been in a howling hurry with your planning and your
packing," said Rob, in an aggrieved tone. "I didn't hear a whisper of
all this when I was here yesterday evening."

"The telegram didn't come until after you had gone," answered Betty.
"But I think godmother must have been expecting it, for in half an hour
her plans were all made, and the packing began early this morning. As
Papa Jack's business will keep him away nearly all fall, there was
nothing to do but close the house and send Lloyd and me to
boarding-school. You can't imagine how busy we've been. We are to leave
to-morrow morning."

"So are we," answered Rob. "Oaklea looks nearly as deserted as Locust. I
always hate this breaking-up time at the end of every summer."

As he spoke, a delicious odour of hot gingerbread was wafted around the
corner of the house from the distant kitchen, and he stopped to look at
Betty and smile.

"What does that make you think of?" he asked.

"Of a lovely September afternoon just like this," answered Betty,
dreamily, half-closing her eyes and drawing in the fragrance with a
slow, deep breath. "Of long shadows on the lawn and the sunshine
flickering down through the locust leaves like gold, just as it is doing
now. Of Malcolm MacIntyre sitting over where you are, thrumming on his
banjo, and of Keith and you and Lloyd and me all singing 'My Old
Kentucky Home.' Is that what it makes you think of?"

"Yes, that and the chase we gave old Aunt Cindy. Wasn't she mad when I
made off with that gingerbread! I can hear her old slipper soles yet,
flopping down the path after me."

"How long ago that seems," mused Betty, "and yet it's only two years."

"It surely must be longer than that," exclaimed Rob.

"No, don't you remember, it was just after Lloyd's house party, when she
was eleven and I was twelve. I went abroad that fall with Cousin Carl
and Eugenia, and stayed with them a year. And I've only been living at
Locust a year. Now I'm a little over fourteen and Lloyd's thirteen; so
that just makes it."

"Thirteen yeahs and foah months exactly, if you're talking about me,"
said the Little Colonel, coming out on the porch with a plate in her
hands. "I smelled the gingahbread, so I told Mom Beck I'd have to stop
for refreshments, and she could finish packing by herself. I've piled
everything on the bed that I thought I could possibly need at
bo'ding-school, and that's neahly everything I own. One needs so many
things going off from home this way. Have some?"

She passed the plate to each one, and then, sitting down on the top step
beside it, helped herself to a slice of the hot, spicy cake.

"Oh, Rob, we're going to have _such_ larks!" she began. "I've always
wanted to go away to school, and have midnight suppahs and do the things
you read about in stories. I've heard mothah talk about the funny things
that happened at the seminary when she was a girl, till I was simply
wild to go there, too. And now it seems too good to be true, that we are
really going, and are to have the very same room that she had one term
when grandfathah was away from home, and she boahded there in little old
Lloydsboro Seminary just as we are going to do. There!" she added,
ruefully, clapping her hand over her mouth. "I've gone and told you, and
I intended to keep you guessing for an hou'ah. I knew you'd nevah think
that we were going to stay right here in the Valley."

"Of course not," answered Rob. "You've been a day pupil at that old
seminary for the last five years, ever since you started to school. I'd
naturally suppose that when you packed up all you owned and started off
to school you'd at least go out of the sight of your own chimney smoke.
I don't see where the fun is coming in. I can't think of anything more
stupid. Instead of tearing around the country on horseback after
lessons, as you've always done, riding where you please, you'll have to
take walks with a gang of other girls with a teacher at the head of the
procession. It's great exercise, that, taking steps about an inch long
and saying nothing but prunes and prisms."

"Don't you believe that's all!" cried Lloyd. "We'll have to take the
walks, of co'se, but think of the time we'll have for basket-ball. We'll
be able to play the Anchorage girls by Thanksgiving, and I couldn't have
been on the team if I'd been only a day pupil."

"Of course we'll miss the ponies," Betty added. "Godmother tried to make
some arrangement with President Wells to let us ride every day; but he
said he couldn't make an exception in our case without being accused of
partiality. If we came as regular pupils we must conform to the regular
rules, and could not have even the liberties we always had as day
pupils."

"Except in one thing," corrected Lloyd. "We can still go to the
post-office for our mail, instead of having all our lettahs pass through
the principal's hands. Mothah thought it wouldn't be worth while to
change the address for just one term, especially as she wants me to
forward the mail that comes to our box for Papa Jack. He changes his
address so often on these business trips that he couldn't keep notifying
the postmistress all the time, so I am to do it."

"Well, I pity _you_!" exclaimed Rob, teasingly, tapping his racket
against the toes of his tennis shoes. "Boarding-schools are a bad lot,
all that I've ever heard of. Scorched oatmeal and dried apples, with old
cats watching at every keyhole! Ugh!"

Both girls laughed at his scowl of disgust, and Betty hastened to say,
"But we'll have Aunt Cindy to fall back on if the fare gets too bad.
That's the beauty of staying so near home. Mom Beck is to come every
Monday to get our clothes to launder, and every Saturday to bring them
back and see that we are all right, and you know she'll not let us
starve. And there aren't any old cats in this school, Rob. Miss Edith is
a dear. The girls fairly love the ground she walks on, and I'm sure
that nobody could be nicer and more motherly than Mrs. Gelling."

"How about Miss Bina McCannister?" asked Rob, with a wry face. "She is
cross enough to stop a clock, sober and prim and crabbed, with eyes like
a fish. I went up there one day with a note from grandfather to
Professor Fowler, and she gave me such a stony glare because I happened
to let a door bang, that I had cold shivers down my spine for a week."

"Oh, Rob," laughed Lloyd. "Aren't you ashamed to talk so? Anyhow, Miss
McCannister will not bother us, because we are not in any of her
classes."

"But she'll take her turn in trotting you out to walk, just the same.
Then think what a glad procession that will be. You'll feel like
prisoners in a chain-gang."

"Talk all you want to, if it amuses you any," said Lloyd, passing the
gingerbread around once more. "It won't keep us from having a good time
at bo'ding-school."

"Well, I'm coming out again at Thanksgiving. There's to be a big family
reunion at Oaklea this year, and if you've stood the storm and still
think that boarding-school life is funny, I'll stand treat to a
five-pound box of Huyler's best. You can let that thought buoy you up
through all the hungry hours between that time and this."

"Mercy, Rob, don't throw cold water on all our bright hopes like that,"
cried Betty, springing up as she heard her name spoken in the hall. "Mom
Beck wants me. She is ready to begin packing my trunk."

"I must go in a few minutes," said Rob, "so if you're disappearing now,
I'll say good-bye till Thanksgiving."

Betty held out her warm little hand. "Good-bye. 'Be good, sweet child,
and let who will be clever,'" she quoted, as Rob gave it an awkward
shake.

"Practise what you preach, Grandma Betty," he said, in a severe tone,
but his blue eyes were smiling into her brown ones with a softened light
in them. She had been a merry little comrade in the summer just gone,
and then there was something in the brown eyes that made everybody smile
on Betty.

As she turned to go she saw that the last crumb of gingerbread had
disappeared, and stooping, picked up the plate. She recognized it as her
godmother's pet piece of Delft ware. "I'll take this in before anybody
steps in it," she said.

"Thanks," said Lloyd, lazily, without looking around, but she turned to
Rob as soon as they were alone. "Betty is always so thoughtful about
such things. I wouldn't know how to get along without her now, and to
think, when she first came heah to live, I wasn't suah that I wanted
her! I had nevah had to divide with anybody befoah, and I was afraid I
should be jealous. But nobody could be jealous of Betty. She seems like
a real suah enough sistah now, and bo'ding-school will be twice the fun
because she can go with me."

"Betty's a brick," agreed Rob emphatically, "the nicest girl I know,
except you, but I can't imagine her planning scrapes. She's too much
afraid of hurting somebody's feelings for that."

"She's not planning scrapes. Neithah of us want to do anything really
bad. We only want to stir the seminary up a bit, and make it lively.
We're growing up so fast that if we don't have some fun soon, it will be
too late. In only a few moah yeahs I'll be through school, and then I'll
have to be a débutante and settle down to be propah and young ladified.
Mom Beck always used to be telling me to 'sit still and be a little
lady,' and if there's anything I despised it was that."

"How fast the shadows grow long these afternoons," said Rob, presently,
looking at his watch. "It's nearly time for me to go. Come on down to
the measuring-tree. We mustn't forget our good-bye ceremony."

Seven Septembers were marked on the tall locust that they called their
measuring-tree. It towered above a rustic seat half-way down the avenue.
Lloyd laid one finger on the lowest notch and another on the next mark a
few inches above it.

"There wasn't neahly so much difference in our heights when I was five
and you six as there is now," she said, with a little sigh. "You're
almost as tall as Papa Jack, and I'm only up to yoah shouldah. You're
growing away from me so fast, Bobby."

Rob threw back his shoulders complacently. "Daddy says that is why I am
so awkward; that my height is too much for a fourteen-year-old boy to
manage gracefully. I'll soon be through growing at this rate. Maybe
after a couple of years more I'll not have to change the mark on the
tree."

"I should certainly hope so," cried Lloyd, "unless you want to be a
giant in a side-show. Heah! Measuah me."

She stiffened herself against the trunk of the tree, standing as erect
as possible, while he stuck the blade of his knife into the bark, so
close to the top of her head that he almost pinned a lock of the light
hair to the tree.

"You've grown a lot too, this last year, Lloyd," he said, looking down
at her approvingly.

"Oh, Rob," she cried, with a quick, wistful look upward into his face.
"I don't want to grow up. It would be so much nicah if we could stay
children always."

"We have had a lot of fun under these old locusts, that's a fact," he
admitted, as he began cutting the date opposite the measurements he had
just taken. Then he became so absorbed in trying to make the figures
neatly that he said nothing more until the task was done.

Lloyd, kneeling on the rustic bench to watch him, was silent also, and
for a few minutes the only sound in all the late afternoon sunshine was
the soft rustling of the leaves overhead.

"If they could only stay children always!" the locusts were repeating
one to another. "Children always! That is the happiest time!" Rob,
intent on his carving, never noticed the stirring of the leaves, but the
Little Colonel, who in a vague way always seemed to understand the
whisperings of these old family sentinels, looked up and listened. As
if she were one of them, she began recalling with them the scenes they
had looked upon. How long ago seemed those summer days when she measured
up only to the first notch. Mom Beck and Rob's faithful old nurse,
Dinah, sat on the bench where she was now kneeling, and watched the two
children that the locusts were whispering about, romping up and down the
avenue. How well she remembered the little blue shoes she wore, and the
jingling of the bells on the gay knitted bridle, as they played horse,
with Fritz barking wildly at their heels.

The locusts had watched them in all the playtimes that lay between the
first and last of those seven notches, eight it would be when Rob had
finished; for it was in their friendly shade they had rolled their hoops
and spun their tops and played at marbles and made their kites. Here,
too, they had set their target when he taught her to shoot with his air
rifle, and up and down in the winter holidays they had passed with their
skates over their shoulders, with their sleds dragging after them, or
their arms piled high with Christmas greens. Here they had tramped,
shoulder to shoulder, whistling like two boys; here they had raced their
ponies; here they had strolled and played and sung together, the
strong, deep friendship yearly growing stronger between them, as they
yearly cut a higher notch in the bark of the old measuring-tree.

"If they could only stay children always!" whispered the locusts again,
with something so like a sigh in the refrain, that Lloyd felt the tears
spring to her eyes, she scarcely knew why.

"There," said Rob, closing his knife and slipping it into his pocket. "I
must go now."

As usual, Lloyd walked down to the gate with him. He whistled as he
went, a musical, rollicking negro chorus, and she joined in with an
accompaniment of little trills and calls, in clever imitation of a
mocking-bird. But just before they reached the gate her whistling
stopped. Her quick eyes spied a four-leafed clover in the grass, and she
sprang forward to get it.

"And heah's anothah!" she cried, triumphantly. "One for you too, Rob.
That means good luck for both of us. Put it in yoah pocket."

Rob took the little charm she held out, with a skeptical smile, yet he
had imbibed too great a belief in such omens from his old coloured nurse
not to regard it with respect. "Thanks," he said, "I have a safer place
than my pocket. I'll need all the luck this or anything else can bring
me in my Latin this year, so I'll carry it to every recitation."
Opening the back of his watch he carefully smoothed the green petals and
laid them inside, then closed the case with a snap. "Now I'm fixed," he
said, with a nod of satisfaction.

At the gate they did not shake hands, but parted as they had done so
many times before, as if they expected to begin their playtime on the
morrow.

"Good-bye, Lloyd," was all he said, with a slight lifting of his cap as
he walked away.

"Good-bye, Bobby," she answered. She stood for a moment shading her eyes
from the sunset, with the hand that held the four-leafed clover, as she
watched him go striding down the road toward Oaklea, switching with his
tennis racket at the asters and goldenrod along his path. Then she went
slowly back to the house, thinking how tall he looked as he strode away.
As she passed the measuring-tree she looked up at the old locusts
overhead, and sure of their sympathy, said, half-aloud, "Oh, I _wish_ we
didn't have to grow up!"




CHAPTER II.

A NEW FRIEND


LLOYDSBORO SEMINARY was not an especially attractive place viewed from
the outside of the high picket fence, which surrounded its entire
domain. The fence itself was forbidding. Its tall pickets, sharp-pointed
and close together, seemed to suggest that strict rules were to be found
inside; rules like the pickets, too firm and pointed to be easily broken
through or climbed over.

The building was old and weather-beaten, but in its prime the school had
been one of the best in the State, and many a woman remembered it
loyally in after years when she had daughters of her own to educate. So
it happened that some of the pupils came long distances, and from many
parts of the country, to sit at the same old desks their mothers sat at,
to study the same old lessons, and to learn to love every rock and tree
on the seminary grounds, because of their associations with all the warm
young friendships formed there.

A group of maples and cedars stood between the seminary and the high
green picket gate in front, with a score of rustic seats and wooden
swings scattered about in their shade. On the east an old neglected
apple orchard sloped away from the house, where during the first few
weeks of school, hard juicy winesaps, russets, and bellflowers lay in
hiding from the hungry schoolgirls, who searched for them in the tall
grass, waving knee-deep among the trees. On the other side, the high
fence separated the grounds from the closely clipped lawn of
Clovercroft, one of the hospitable old homesteads of the Valley, whose
wide porches and vine-covered tower made a charming picture from the
western windows of the seminary.

The opening day of school was always a sort of gala occasion. No regular
work could be done, for pupils were continually coming in on the various
trains to be registered and assigned to classes. After chapel exercises
the day pupils were at liberty to go home, but it was a time-honoured
custom for them to adjourn to the apple orchard, to hold a reunion with
all the last year's boarders who had returned.

The swings and seats in front of the seminary were left for the
newcomers. Many a longing glance was cast toward the orchard by the
strangers, who, left thus inhospitably alone, made shy advances toward
acquaintance among themselves. On the morrow they, too, might be
included in the friendly little groups exchanging confidences with their
heads close together, and walking with their arms around each other
under the gnarly old trees; but that they should be ignored the first
day was as binding as the unwritten "laws of the jungle."

From her seat in the swing nearest the house, a new girl watched the
others swarming out from chapel, laughing and talking and calling to
those ahead to wait. The primary grades went racing through the warm
morning sunshine, down to their playhouses by the spring. The seniors
and juniors strolled off in opposite directions in dignified
exclusiveness, to different parts of the orchard. Each group as it
passed attracted the new girl's attention, but her interest centred in a
dozen or more girls lingering on the front steps. Their ages seemed to
range from twelve to fifteen years. They were evidently waiting for some
one.

"Why don't they hurry?" asked an impatient voice. "What's the matter?"

"The matron stopped them," some one answered. "I heard her asking about
some bedding that was to be sent from Locust."

It was nearly five minutes before some one interrupted a discussion that
had begun, to call "Here they come!" Then a chorus of calls began most
confusing to the girl in the swing, who did not know the names of the
newcomers who seemed to be so popular.

"I bid to walk with the Little Colonel!"

"Come on, Elizabeth Lloyd Lewis, I'm waiting for you."

"Hurry up, Betty! I've got something to tell you!"

"Lloyd! Lloyd Sherman! Can't you hear? Is it really true that you are
going to board here?"

With the two girls in their midst, trying to explain to a dozen
different questioners in the same breath, when and why they had become
resident pupils, the noisy procession moved on. Only one was left
behind, a pale-faced child in spectacles, who, in spite of all their
protests, stood looking after them, insisting she must wait for Sue
Bell.

As the others moved away, the new girl beckoned to her with a friendly
smile. "You're Janie Clung, aren't you?" she asked, as the little girl
advanced a few steps, and then stood awkwardly rubbing one foot against
the other.

"You see I couldn't help hearing your name. They spoke it so often. I am
Ida Shane, from Clay County. Won't you sit here in the swing with me
until the girl you are waiting for comes out, and tell me something
about the school? It's so hard," she added, plaintively, "to be a
stranger in a place where everybody else has so many friends. You seem
to know every one here. From the way they all begged you to go with
them, I imagine you must be very popular."

Much flattered by this last remark from one so much older than herself,
Janie climbed into the seat in the swing, opposite the girl from Clay
County, and scrutinized her shyly.

Ida Shane was very pretty, she decided. She must be nearly sixteen, or
maybe more, for she wore her dresses long and her hair in a soft, fluffy
pompadour. Then Janie's gaze wandered from her hair to a bewitching
little dimple that came at the corner of Ida's mouth when she smiled,
and she thought to herself that the slow, soft drawl in which Ida spoke
was exceedingly musical and ladylike. She found herself talking in a
lower tone than usual, and quite slowly, when she answered.

"You know, I think it is always best to be very particular in choosing
friends when one goes to a new place," Ida remarked, in a confidential
tone, which seemed to insinuate that Janie could be safely chosen. "I
don't want to take up with everybody. That's why I want you to tell me
which are the first families here in the Valley, and which are the girls
whose friendship is worth while having."

Simple little Janie, who considered friendship with everybody worth
having, looked puzzled.

"Well, for instance, who were those two girls in white duck dresses whom
you were all waiting for so long? The one with the lovely long light
hair that they called Lloyd and the Little Colonel? Now _she's_
aristocratic-looking, and all the girls seem to regard her as a sort of
leader. Tell me about her."

"Oh, that's Lloyd Sherman," answered Janie. "I reckon you might say she
belongs to one of the first families. She lives in a perfectly beautiful
place called Locust. The Valley is named after some of her ancestors,
and old Colonel Lloyd is her grandfather. 'Little Colonel' is just one
of her nicknames. She's had everything that heart could wish, and has
been to Europe. When she came back she brought a magnificent St. Bernard
dog with her that had been trained as a Red Cross war-dog for the
ambulance service in the German army. They called him Hero, and he acted
in a play they gave here last fall, called the 'Rescue of the Princess
Winsome.' I was one of the flower messengers in the play. Lloyd was the
Princess. She looked exactly like one that night. The dog saved her life
while they were in Switzerland, and when he died the family made as much
fuss over him as if he had been a person. He was buried with military
honours, and there is a handsome monument over his grave. I'll show it
to you sometime, when we walk past Locust."

Janie paused with a long breath. It was more of a speech than she was
accustomed to making, but Ida had listened with such flattering
attention that it was easier to talk to her than to any one whom she had
ever known.

"I thought she was like that," remarked Ida, in an I-told-you-so tone.
"I rarely make mistakes in people. Now that other one they call Betty.
She has a sweet face."

"I should say she has!" cried Janie, warmly. "She's the dearest girl in
school. Everybody loves Betty Lewis. She is Mrs. Sherman's goddaughter,
and lives at Locust too. She writes the loveliest poetry. Why, she wrote
that whole play of the Princess Winsome, and every one thought it was
wonderful. Mr. Sherman had several copies of it printed and bound in
carved leather. He gave one copy to the seminary library, so you can
read it if you want to."

"That'll be the first thing I shall draw from the library," said Ida,
nodding approvingly at the account of Betty. "Then there's some one else
I want to ask about," she continued. "I was told that General Walton's
family lives here, and that his daughters go to this school. I don't
mind telling you, in confidence, you know, that that is what made my
aunt finally decide to send me to this school instead of the one in
Frankfort. Were they here this morning?"

"Yes, and they are Lloyd's best friends. Maybe you noticed two girls in
pink, with great dark eyes, lovely eyes, who walked off with her, one on
each side."

"Yes, I wondered who they were."

"The larger one was Allison and the other one Kitty. They live at The
Beeches. We walk past there nearly every day. Once, last year, Miss
Edith took some of us in there, and Mrs. Walton showed us all her curios
and relics. It is a fascinating place to visit. There are things from
all over the world in every room, and a story about each one."

"How interesting!" smiled Ida, showing a glimpse of her dimple and
passing a slim hand, glittering with many rings, over her pompadour.
"You can't imagine how entertaining you are, Janie; tell me some more."

With a slight movement of the foot she started the swing to swaying,
and, leaning back in the seat with an air of attention, waited for Janie
to go on. With such a listener, Janie was in a fair way to tell all she
knew, when Sue Bell appeared in the doorway, beckoning to her. She even
felt a decided sense of annoyance at the interruption, although Sue Bell
was her dearest friend, so much was she enjoying Ida as an audience.

"That new girl is perfectly lovely!" she declared to Sue Bell, as they
moved off together. She repeated the opinion so often after she reached
the orchard, and had so much to say about Ida Shane's hair and Ida
Shane's dimple, and the stacks of rings she had, and the stylish clothes
she wore, that some of the girls exchanged amused glances. Kitty Walton
remarked in a teasing tone that she believed the new girl must have
hoodooed Janie Clung, so that she couldn't do anything but sing her
praises.

"You ought to be ashamed to talk that way, Kitty Walton," cried Janie,
in angry defence of her new friend, "especially when she said such nice
things about your family being celebrities, and that was one reason her
aunt sent her to this school, because the daughters of such a famous
general were pupils here. And she thinks Lloyd is so aristocratic-looking,
and Betty awfully sweet, and so smart to write that play. And she said,
even if you all are lots younger than herself, she'd rather have you for
her friends than any of the seniors, because she could tell just by
looking at you that you belong to the best old families in the place."

"What did she say about the rest of us?" cried Mittie Dupong, mockingly,
winking at her nearest neighbour.

Janie, turning in time to see the wink, answered shortly, "Nothing. She
doesn't intend to make friends with _everybody_."

It was an indiscreet speech, and the moment it was made she realized
that it would be counted against Ida, instead of in her favour, as she
had intended it to be. Significant glances passed among those who had
not been included in Ida's classification of celebrities or first
families, and Mittie Dupong retorted, with a shrug of her shoulders,
"Hm! Miss Shane may find that there are people in the world as
particular as herself. Who is _she_, anyway, that she should give
herself such airs?"

No one answered the question, but there was sown at that moment in more
than one girl's mind a little seed of dislike which took deep root as
the days went by. But if Ida's thoughtlessly repeated speech worked her
ill in one way, it had an opposite effect with those whose favour she
wished most to gain. Allison and Kitty met her with especial
friendliness when Janie stopped them at the swing, as they started home
at noon. It was pleasant for them to feel that she had been drawn to the
school partly on their account. It gave them a sense of importance they
had never experienced before.

Lloyd, too, unconsciously influenced by the flattering recollection that
she had been singled out from all the others as aristocratic-looking,
took especial care to be gracious when she found herself seated across
from Ida at the dinner-table. The old pupils had been given their usual
places, but Betty and Lloyd were among the newcomers.

"Now I feel for the first time that I'm really away at bo'ding-school,"
Lloyd said, with a smile, which included Ida in the conversation, as she
glanced down the long table, stretched the entire length of the
dining-room. "It seems as if we might be hundreds of miles away from
home instead of one. I can hardly believe that we are still in
Lloydsboro Valley. Betty, isn't it time for us to begin to feel
homesick?"

"Not till dark comes," answered Betty. "Twilight is the regulation time
in boarding-school stories."

Lloyd smiled across at Ida. "Do you think you are going to be homesick?"

"Oh, no, indeed!" answered Ida, in her slow, sweet voice. The dimple
which had charmed Janie flashed into sight. "This is the fourth
boarding-school I have been sent to. I am used to going to new places."

"The fo'th!" exclaimed Lloyd, with surprised emphasis. A curious "Why?"
almost slipped off her tongue, but she stopped it politely in the
middle, and managed to stammer instead, as she salted her soup, "Wh-what
fun you must have had!"

"I have," answered Ida, with a glance toward the end of the table where
Miss Bina McCannister sat grim and watchful. "Sometime I'll tell you
about some of my adventures."

As the dinner progressed, both Lloyd and Betty felt themselves yielding
to the soft charm of manner which had won little Janie Clung's
admiration, and by the time they had finished their dessert they were
ready to join in Janie's most enthusiastic praises of the new girl.

"Do you know that my room is in the same wing with yours, just next
door?" Ida asked, as they rose from the table. "At least, I think so,
for as I came down to dinner I saw some trunks being carried in there,
marked E. L. L. and L. S."

"I am so glad!" exclaimed Lloyd. "I wondered who we should have for
neighbahs. Betty and I ran up there a few minutes this mawning, but the
beds and things mothah wanted us to use hadn't been sent ovah from
Locust, and it was so topsy-turvy we didn't stay."

"I came yesterday," said Ida, as the three went up the stairs together,
"so I've had time to investigate. I imagine we shall be able to do about
as we please. You see, this wing of the house was added several years
after the main part was built, so there are four rooms on this floor,
nicely cut off by themselves."

She opened the door from the main corridor, and led the way into the
narrow side-hall which separated the four rooms from the rest of the
house.

"Several nights in the week the three of us will be here alone," she
said. "This tiny room at the end belongs to that queer little Magnolia
Budine whom everybody laughed at this morning. She lives near enough the
seminary to go home every Friday night and stay till Monday morning. The
three Clark sisters have this big room next to hers, and they go home to
spend Sundays, too. By the way, wasn't it ridiculous the way Miss
McCannister got their names all balled up this morning in the history
division, trying to say _Carrie Clark_, _Clara Clark_, _Cora Clark_?"

"It was funny," laughed Lloyd. "Kitty Walton whispered to me that they
ought to be called the triplets, because every one trips and stuttahs
ovah their names. It's as bad as trying to say 'Six slim, slick, silvah
saplings.'"

They had reached the third room by this time, the door of which stood
open. "This is ours," said Lloyd. "The very same one mothah had one term
when she was a girl."

She paused on the threshold, looking around the large, airy apartment,
well pleased.

"I wonder if the outside stairway was built when she was here," said
Ida. "I discovered it yesterday."

"I nevah heard her say anything about it," said Lloyd. "Where is it?"

"This way," answered Ida, leading them past her own room, which came
next, and pushing aside a heavy portière which covered a door at the
opposite end of the hall from Magnolia Budine's room.

"The matron told me that a slight fire in the school, one time, led to
the building, of this extra means of escape, but the girls are forbidden
to use the stairs for any other purpose."

"Let's open it," proposed Lloyd, daringly, fumbling with the bolt, which
had lain so long unused that it had rusted in its socket. It moved
stiffly with a grating sound as she pushed it back. The door swung open
on to a small, uncovered landing, from which an open staircase descended
to the rear of the kitchen.

"I've often seen these steps from the outside," said Lloyd, "but I
didn't know where they led to. No, I nevah heard mothah speak of them.
Isn't it fun to have a secret stairway of our own! Why do you suppose
they have a curtain ovah the doah?"

"To hide it," said Betty, wisely, "so that the daily sight of it will
not put it into our naughty heads to make use of it, and prowl around at
nights. They evidently think 'How oft the sight of means to do ill
deeds makes ill deeds done.' So they cover it up."

"That's from Shakespeare, isn't it?" asked Ida. "I'd give anything if I
could make appropriate quotations like that, but I never think of the
right thing till it's too late. But then, I suppose it comes easy to any
one smart enough to write as you do. I am so anxious to read that play
of yours, 'The Rescue of the Princess Winsome.' I was told that there is
a copy in the library. Your room ought to be called 'Sweet Peas,' since
it belongs to a princess and a poetess."

Betty blushed with pleasure. They had bolted the door again and were
standing in front of their room, as Ida proposed the name of Sweet Peas.

"It is kind of you to give us such a sweet name for our room," said
Lloyd. "Will you come in while we unpack?"

"No, thank you," was the answer. "I have some letters to write before
four o'clock. That is the time, I believe, when we all have to turn out
together for a walk." She turned away, but came back to ask,
hesitatingly, "There's one thing I'd like to ask, Lloyd; do you mind if
I call you Princess instead of Lloyd? The Princess Winsome? That name
seems to suit you so well. The first thing I noticed about you was the
proud little way you lift your head. You carry yourself like one."

A bright colour swept across Lloyd's face. "Of co'se I don't mind," she
said, "and it is deah of you to care to call me that."

When Ida went back to her own room, it was with the comfortable feeling
that she had left a very agreeable impression behind her.

"Isn't she a darling!" exclaimed Lloyd, enthusiastically, when she and
Betty were alone, with their door closed. "She is pretty and stylish,
and certainly has lovely mannahs. Besides, she is as sma'ht as can be,
and mighty entahtaining. I've taken a great fancy to her."

"So have I," admitted Betty. "I love to sit and watch her. The least
thing she says in that soft, slow way sounds sweet. I am so glad that
her room is next to ours."

Mrs. Sherman had advised taking few furnishings to the seminary, but
Lloyd insisted that they could not feel that they were really away at
boarding-school unless they had all that goes to equip a modern college
girl's room. So pictures and posters, sofa-pillows and book-racks were
crowded into the overflowing trunks. A chafing-dish, a well-furnished
tea-basket, a dainty chocolate-pot, and a mandolin were brought over in
the carriage that took Mrs. Sherman to the depot. Both girls were kept
busy until four o'clock, finding places to put their numerous
possessions. Neither one realized how far she had passed under the spell
of the new pupil, but unconsciously every picture they hung and every
article they unpacked was located with a thought of her approval.

Once as Lloyd passed the mirror, when Betty's back was turned, she
paused to look at her reflection with the pleased consciousness that Ida
had spoken the truth; that she did hold her head proudly and carry
herself well. And Betty several times passed her hand up over the brown
curls on her forehead, recalling the graceful gesture of the white,
heavily ringed hand. While she tacked up posters and put away clothes,
she chattered busily with Lloyd, but through her thoughts, like an
undercurrent to their conversation, ran a few musical lines suggested by
the white hands and low voice. An "Ode to Ida" had already begun to
weave itself into shape in her busy little brain.

A few minutes before the gong sounded, summoning the girls to the first
of their daily walks, Ida tapped on the door. She had only stopped to
ask a question about the rules, she said, and must run back and put on
her hat; but catching sight of a picture of the long avenue at Locust,
which hung over Lloyd's bed, she crossed the room to examine it.

"You've made a perfect love of a room with all these handsome things,"
she said, looking around admiringly. "But"--she scanned the few
photographs on the mantel, and the two on the dressing-table in their
frames of beaten silver--"it seems so queer, you know. You haven't the
picture of a single boy. Didn't you bring any?"

"No!" answered Lloyd, in surprise. "Why should I?"

"But you have some at home, haven't you?" persisted Ida.

"Yes, I have lovely ones of Allison Walton's cousins, Malcolm and Keith
MacIntyre, taken in the costumes they wore as 'two little knights of
Kentucky.' And I have one of Ranald Walton taken in his captain's
uniform, and nearly a dozen of Rob Moore. He's given me one whenevah
he's had them taken, from the time he wore kilts and curls."

"My _dear_!" exclaimed Ida. "Why didn't you bring them? They would have
been such an addition."

"Because I don't want any boy's pictuah stuck up on my dressing-table. I
like to have them, because they've been my playmates always, and when
we're grown up I'd like to remembah just how they looked, but that's no
reason I want my walls plastahed with them now."

"What an original little thing you are, Princess," exclaimed Ida, with a
laugh, which would have nettled Lloyd had not the compliment and the
title taken away its sting. "Come into my room and see how my walls are
plastered, as you call it."

Lloyd stared around in astonishment when Ida threw open her door. Boyish
faces looked back at her from every side. Handsome ones, homely ones, in
groups, in pairs, framed and unframed, strung together with ribbons, or
stuck in behind Japanese fans. Added to all the other pictures of girls
she had known in the three boarding-schools which she had attended, it
gave the room the appearance of a photograph gallery.

"Well!" exclaimed Lloyd, at length, after a long, slow survey, "I don't
see what you want them for." Unconsciously her head took the haughty
uplift which Ida had admired.

"For the same reason that an Indian hangs up all the scalp-locks he
takes, I suppose," drawled Ida, sweetly. "Of course, you're young yet.
You don't understand. But you'll look at things differently when you are
as near 'sweet sixteen' as I am, Princess."

Again that flattering title took the sting out of the patronizing manner
which Lloyd otherwise would have resented. Was it only the afternoon
before, she wondered, that she had cried out to the friendly old locusts
her longing to be a child always?

As Ida crossed the room with a graceful sweep of long skirts, and
settled her hat with its clusters of violets jauntily over her fluffy
pompadour, there stole into the Little Colonel's heart, for the first
time, a vague desire; a half-defined wish that she, too, were as near
the borders of grown-up land as "sweet sixteen."




CHAPTER III.

IDA'S SECRET


"BETTY," said Lloyd, one morning, the third week of school, as she sat
on the edge of her bed lacing her shoes, "you know that little
glove-case you embroidered for my birthday present; would you feel hurt
if I were to give it away?"

"No," answered Betty, slowly, turning from the mirror, brush in hand. "I
made it to please you, and if you can find more pleasure in giving it
away than in keeping it, I'd be glad for you to give it away."

"Honestly, Betty?"

"Yes, honestly." The brown eyes turned with truthful directness toward
Lloyd.

"Oh, you are such a comfortable sort of person to live with, Betty
Lewis," exclaimed the Little Colonel, with a sigh of relief. "Most girls
would think that I didn't appreciate all those fine stitches you put
into it, and didn't care for eithah the gift or the givah if I was
willing to part with it; but I was suah you would undahstand. You see,
the violets on it make it such a perfect match for everything on Ida's
dressing-table, that it seems as if it ought to belong to her. I can't
look at a violet now without thinking of her. She is so much like one,
don't you think? Refined and sweet, and her eyes are such a dark blue,
and have such a shy, appealing way of looking out from undah those long
lashes. And have you evah noticed what delicious sachet she uses? So
faint it's not much moah than the whispah of a smell, but there's always
a touch of it about everything belonging to her. I call her Violet all
the time now."

Only the mirror saw the bored expression that shaded Betty's face for an
instant. For the last week, morning, noon, and night, she had heard
nothing from Lloyd but Ida's praises. A sudden intimacy had sprung up
between the two which threatened to eclipse all Lloyd's other
friendships. Betty began brushing her hair vigorously. "Will you promise
not to feel hurt if I give you a piece of advice?" she asked.

Lloyd nodded, lazily wondering what was coming, as she reached down to
pick up her other shoe. She did not put it on, however, but sat with it
in her hand, staring at Betty, scarcely believing that she heard
aright, the advice was so different from anything she had expected.

"Then don't call her Violet before the other girls. And if I were in
your place I don't believe I'd talk about her to them, quite as much as
you do. You see," she hurried on, noticing the quick flush of
displeasure on Lloyd's face, "I don't suppose you realize how much you
do talk about her, or how you have changed lately. Last year you were
good friends with all the girls, ready for any fun they proposed. They
liked that independent, bossy little way you had of deciding things for
them. That was one thing that made you so popular. But now you always
wait to find out what Ida thinks, and what Ida wants, and they feel that
you've not only dropped your old friends for a stranger whom you've
known only three weeks, but that in some sort of a way--I can't explain
it--you've dropped your old self too. Really, I believe that they are as
jealous of the influence she has over you, as of the way she monopolizes
you."

Betty did not see the gathering storm in the Little Colonel's face, and
went serenely on brushing her hair. "You know she's so much older than
you. They always smile so significantly when she calls you Princess, as
if they thought she was doing it to flatter you. While they wouldn't
say it openly to me, of course, I've heard them whispering among
themselves that Ida had hoodooed you as she had Janie Clung, so that all
you live for nowadays is to wait on her and buy her candy and violets."

Bang! went Lloyd's shoe against the wall. She had sent it spinning
across the room with all her force. Betty, turning in dismay, saw that
the advice which she had given with the kindest of motives, had aroused
the Little Colonel's temper to white heat.

"The mean, hateful things!" she cried. "They've no right to talk about
Ida that way! The idea of her stooping to such a thing as to flatter any
one for what she could get out of them! It's an outrageous--"

"But Lloyd, dear," interrupted Betty. "Listen a minute. You promised
that you wouldn't get mad, or I wouldn't have said a word."

"I'm not mad with you, but Mittie Dupong and some of the rest of them
have been hateful to Ida from the very first." There was something like
a sob in her voice. "And she's so alone in the world, too. She's told me
things about her life that almost made me cry. Her aunt doesn't
undahstand her at all, and she has a misa'ble time at home."

"But she needn't feel alone in the world here," insisted Betty. "Every
girl in school would have been her friend, if she hadn't said at the
start that she didn't care for anybody but us and the Walton girls.
They'd be only too glad to take her in, even now, for the sake of having
you back again. Oh, it was so much nicer last year."

Lloyd faced her indignantly. "Betty Lewis!" she exclaimed. "You're
against her too, or you wouldn't say that."

"No, I'm not," insisted Betty. "I like her now just as much as I did the
first day I saw her. I think she is sweet and lovable, and I don't
wonder that you are very fond of her; but I must say that I'm sorry that
she's in the school, for you don't seem to care for anything now but
being with her, and that spoils all the good times we had planned to
have."

Dead silence followed Betty's speech. The Little Colonel walked across
the room, picked up her shoe and put it on, jerking the laces savagely.
It was the first time that she had ever been angry with Betty, and her
wrath was more than Betty could endure.

"Please don't feel hurt, Lloyd," she begged. "I can't bear to have you
angry with me. I wouldn't have said a word, only I thought that if it
was explained to you how we all felt, you'd be willing to spend a
little more time with the others, and gradually they'd get interested in
Ida and be nice to her for your sake, and things would go on as they
used to, when we all had such good times together."

Again the painful silence, so deep that Betty felt as if a wall had
risen between them.

"Please, Lloyd," she begged, with tears in her eyes. But Lloyd, with an
air of injured dignity, went on dressing, without a word, until the last
bow was tied, and the last pin in place.

"And she knew all the time that Ida is my dearest friend," Lloyd kept
saying angrily to herself, as she moved about the room. "I could have
forgiven her saying mean things about _me_, but for her to stand up and
say to my very face that she is sorry Ida is in the school, and that her
being here spoils all the good times, when she _knows_ what I think of
Ida, that is simply a plain insult, and I can nevah feel the same to
Betty Lewis again!"

By the time the breakfast-bell rang, both the girls were almost in
tears; for the longer Betty's speech rankled in Lloyd's mind the worse
it hurt, and the longer the angry silence continued the worse Betty
felt.

"It is not like Lloyd to be so unfair," thought Betty. "She's just so
blinded by her infatuation for Ida that she can't see my side of the
matter at all."

It was on the point of her tongue to speak her thought, but realizing
that it would only add fuel to the flame, she checked the impulse, and
in the same uncomfortable silence they marched stiffly down the stairs
to breakfast.

It was a miserable day for both. To peace-loving Betty it seemed
endless. She could hardly keep the tears back when she stood up to
recite, and instead of joining the other girls at recess she wandered
off with a pencil and note-book. Sitting in one of the swings she wrote
some verses about broken friendships that made her cry. They began:

    "Dead are the snowy daisies!
       Dead are the flowers of May!
     The winds are hoarse and voiceless,
       The skies are cold and gray!"

And yet a more gloriously golden October day had never shone in the
Valley. The sun on the sumach bushes and sweet gum-trees turned their
leaves to a flaming red that the heart of a ruby might have envied, and
the dogwood berries, redder than any rose, glowed like living fire in
the depths of the woods.

For the last week Lloyd and Ida had spent every recess together,
wandering off by themselves to a far corner of the apple orchard, where
the trunk of a fallen tree provided them with a seat, and its twisted
branches with a rustic screen; but this day when Lloyd needed sympathy
and companionship more than on any other, it was suddenly denied her.

Ida had a worried, absent-minded air when she came out at recess after
the distribution of the morning mail. She came up to Lloyd in the hall
with a grave face. "I am in trouble, Princess," she said, in a low tone.
"I'll explain sometime before long, but I must go to my room now. I have
an important letter to write."

With heavy forebodings Lloyd wandered back to her desk and sat looking
listlessly out of the open window. She could hear laughter and merry
voices in conversation outside. Nuts rattled down from the old
hickory-tree by the well, and an odour of wild grapes floated in from
the vine that trailed over it, where some belated bunches hung too high
for any fingers but the frost's to touch. She took no interest in
anything.

The afternoon recess passed in the same way. Miss Bina McCannister led
the procession when they went for their afternoon walk. Ida had been
excused from joining them, so Lloyd walked beside Janie Clung, in stony
silence. Betty was in front of them, and Lloyd, almost stepping on her
heels, could think of nothing but the remark that had changed her whole
day to gall and wormwood. She resented it doubly, now that poor Ida was
in some mysterious trouble.

Betty occasionally cast an anxious glance backward. "She'll surely make
up before the sun goes down," she thought. But the sun went down as they
strolled homeward, the moon came up, and lights twinkled from all the
seminary windows. The supper-bell rang, and a horde of hungry girls
poured into the dining-room, but through all the cheerful clatter of
dishes and hum of voices, Lloyd kept her dignified silence toward Betty
unbroken. Ida had evidently been crying, and had little to say. She left
the table before the others were through.

When Betty went to her room for the study hour, she found Lloyd sitting
with her elbows on the table before the lamp, seemingly so absorbed in
her history lesson that she did not notice the opening of the door. With
a sigh Betty sank into a chair on the opposite side of the table, and
drew her arithmetic toward her, but she could not fix her mind on the
next day's problems. She was rehearsing a dozen different ways in which
to open a conversation, and trying to screw her courage to the point of
beginning.

While she hesitated there was a slight tap at the door and Miss Edith
looked in. It was her evening to make the round of inspection. Seeing
both girls apparently absorbed in their books, she closed the door and
passed on. Five minutes went by, in which Betty kept glancing at Lloyd,
almost on the point of speaking. There was another tap at the door, and
before either could call Come, Ida opened it and beckoned. With an
answering nod as if she understood, Lloyd gathered up her books and
joined her in the hall. There was a whispered consultation, then Betty
heard them go into Ida's room and close the door.

Feeling that the breach between them was growing wider every hour, and
that Lloyd never intended to be friendly with her again, Betty laid her
head down on her arms and began to cry. Not since she had lain ill and
neglected in the bare little room at the Cuckoo's Nest, the time she had
the fever, had she felt so miserable and lonely. Not once in all the
time since she had been at Locust had she cried like that, with choking
sobs that shook her whole body, and seemed to come from the depths of
her poor little aching heart.

She was crying so bitterly that she did not hear Ida's door open again
or light footsteps go cautiously down to the end of the hall. Somebody
slowly and carefully slipped back the bolt that barred the door leading
to the outside stairway. Then the knob turned, and two muffled figures
stood outside in the moonlight.

"Hurry!" whispered Ida, catching Lloyd by the hand. Like two shadows
they tiptoed down the stairs and across a little open space in the rear
of the kitchen, till they reached the cover of heavier shadows, under
the protecting trees. Then they ran on as if pursued, keeping close to
the high picket fence.

Down in the old apple orchard, in the far corner where the fallen tree
lay, they stopped at last, and Ida dropped breathlessly to a seat on the
log, and leaned back among the twisted branches.

"There!" she exclaimed, throwing off the heavy golf-cape in which she
had muffled herself. "Now I can breathe. Oh, I've been so upset all day,
Princess. I felt as if I should choke if I stayed in that old building
another minute. Besides, walls do have ears sometimes, and I wouldn't
have anybody find out what I am going to tell you for worlds! It would
get me into no end of trouble, and aunt would take me out of school
again."

She paused a moment, and Lloyd, waiting expectantly, felt the witchery
of the moonlighted night stealing over her. She had been Ida's
confidante often of late. She knew the history of each friendship
represented by each boy's photograph in Ida's collection, and she had
found them all interesting, even when told in prosaic daylight. Beyond
the shadowy old orchard a row of yellow-leaved maples gleamed a ghostly
silver in the moonlight, and from the direction of Clovercroft stole the
music of a violin. Some one was playing Schubert's Serenade. It stirred
her strangely.

"Will you promise that you'll never tell a living, breathing soul?"
asked Ida, finally, in a low voice.

"Of co'se I wouldn't tell," said Lloyd. "You know that perfectly well,
Violet."

"Well, _I'm engaged_."

"You're what?" exclaimed Lloyd, with such a start of astonishment that
she nearly slipped off the log.

"Sh!" whispered Ida. "Somebody'll hear us if you talk so loud."

[Illustration: "SHE TURNED HER WHITE FINGERS IN THE MOONLIGHT."]

Feeling as if a chapter of some thrilling romance had suddenly opened
before her, Lloyd sat up straight, waiting for the heroine to speak
again. The moonlight gave Ida's face an almost unearthly whiteness, and
there were dark shadows under her eyes. She had been crying.

"Aunt never wanted me to have anything to do with Edwardo," she began,
in a low tone. "That isn't his real name, but I always call him that.
She took me out of the Lexington school because he lived near there. She
thought that sending me down here would put an end to our
correspondence, but it didn't, of course. We kept on corresponding, just
the same. Some way she has found it out. She doesn't know that we are
engaged. I don't know what she would be tempted to do if she knew. She
is angry enough just about the letters. I had one from her this morning,
and I saw one on the table addressed to President Wells, in her
handwriting. There is no mistaking it. I am sure she has written to him
to watch my mail and intercept his letters. I wouldn't have her get hold
of them for anything, because she scorns anything like sentiment. She
seems to think it is something wicked for young people to care for each
other, and Edwardo's letters simply _breathe_ devotion in every
word."

The faint strains of the distant violin swelled louder as Ida held out
her hand from which she had taken all the rings but one. She turned her
white fingers in the moonlight, to show the glimmer of a pearl.

"He has told me so many times that that is what my life seems like to
him," she said, with a sob in her voice, "--a pearl. I know he has been
awfully wild and fast, but when he tells me that only my influence over
him can make him the man I want him to be, and that if it were not for
my love and prayers he wouldn't care what became of him, or what he did,
do you blame me for disregarding aunt's wishes? Don't you think it is
cruel of her to interfere?"

Lloyd, listening with breathless interest to the friend whom she loved
with all a little girl's adoring enthusiasm for an older one whom she
has taken as her model, gave a passionate assent.

"Oh, I knew you'd feel that way about it," said Ida, reaching out to
clasp Lloyd's hand with the white one on which glimmered the pearl. "It
is _so_ good to have some one to talk to who can understand and
sympathize."

An eloquent silence fell between them, broken only by the rustle of the
dead leaves and the wailing voice of the violin, repeating its plaintive
refrain like a human cry. The music and the witchery of the moonlight
laid an ever-deepening spell on the listening child, till she felt that
she was part of some old tale in which Ida was the ladye fair, and
Edwardo the most interesting of heroes, held apart by a cruel fate. She
drank in every word eagerly, seeing in her imagination a tall, handsome
man with a haughty, dark face, who stood with outstretched hands,
murmuring, "Oh, my Pearl, you can make of my life what you will!"

When Ida took a tiny locket from a chain around her neck and opened it
to show her his picture, Lloyd felt a distinct twinge of disappointment.
It was not at all like the face she had pictured. But Ida explained that
it was not a good likeness, only a head cut from a group picture in
which he had been taken with the members of his football team. She had a
fine photograph of him in her trunk, but had to keep it hidden, not
knowing what day her aunt might swoop down upon her for a visit of
inspection.

"Seems to me as if I had seen that face befoah somewhere," said the
Little Colonel, studying it intently in the dim light. There was a
familiarity about it that puzzled her.

Ida slipped the locket back and gathered up her cape about her. "We
won't dare stay here much longer," she said. Then she hesitated.
"Princess, I have told you all this because I need your help and am
going to ask a great favour of you. Your mail doesn't have to go through
the principal's hands. Will you be willing to let Edwardo address my
letters to you? It couldn't do you any harm, simply to take them from
the post-office box and hand them to me, and it would make a world of
difference to me--and to him," she added, softly. "If I were to refuse
to let him write to me, as aunt wants me to do, and were to break off
our engagement, I think it would make him so reckless that he would do
something desperate. Knowing that, I feel so responsible for him.
Princess, I'd give my life to keep him straight."

As Ida rose in her earnestness, the tears glistening in her eyes, she
seemed to Lloyd like some fair guardian angel, and from that moment she
was set apart in her imagination as if she had been a saint on a
pedestal. With such a noble example of devotion to one in need, it
seemed a very small thing for Lloyd to consent to the favour she asked,
and she gave her promise gladly.

"I shall do everything I can to keep any one from suspecting that he is
sending letters to me through you," said Ida, as they strolled slowly
back toward the house. "I can't let your friendship for me get you into
trouble. They'll watch me very closely now, so maybe it will be as well
for me not to appear so intimate with you as I have been. We'll not come
off here alone any more at recess. By and by, when I feel that I can,
I'll try to interest myself in the other girls. We'll still have our
little confidential meetings just the same, but no one must suspect us.

"I wish Mrs. Walton would invite me to her house sometimes," she said,
impulsively, when they had walked a few minutes in silence. "If I could
fill up a long letter to aunt about that, it would make her feel that I
was interested in something besides Edwardo, and would appease her
wonderfully."

"I'll ask her to," said Lloyd, eagerly. "Mrs. Walton told mothah she
intended to have Betty and me at The Beeches very often while she was
away. The first time she invites us I'll ask her to have you too. She's
so kind and sweet, that I'd as soon do it as not. All she seems to live
for is just to make othah people happy."

"Oh, Princess, if you only would!" exclaimed Ida, giving her a delighted
hug. "Aunt would be so pleased, for it would be in all the home papers
that I had been entertained at the home of the late General Walton. She
would consider it such an honour, and feel that in one way, at least, I
was a credit to her. Aunt thinks so much of attentions from
distinguished people. It is one of her hobbies. I would like to please
her as much as possible in every way I can, as long as I have to
disregard her wishes about--what I just told you, you know. Sh! We're
too near the house to talk any more."

The rest of the way they slipped along in silence under the shadow of
the trees. Up the creaking stairway they crept, pausing a moment before
they opened the door. Then they shot the rusty bolt noiselessly back in
place, dropped the portière, and listened again.

"It's all right," whispered Ida, giving Lloyd's hand a reassuring
squeeze as they tiptoed down the hall. "Oh, you're _such_ a comfort!
You'll never know what a load you've taken off my mind. Good night!"

In those few moments of silence between the orchard and the house,
Lloyd's thoughts travelled rapidly. Her quarrel with Betty had faded so
far into the background, that it seemed ridiculously trivial now. She
had forgotten her grievance in listening to the tale of larger trouble.
And since Ida had made it clear to her that it would be to her interest
to be friendly with all the girls, she was eager to enlist Betty's
sympathies and help. She wished fervently that she could share her
secret with her. She burst into the room, her eyes shining with
excitement, and blinking as they met the bright lamplight.

Betty was standing in her nightgown, ready for bed. She saw at the first
glance that Lloyd's anger was over, and she drew a great sigh of relief.

"Oh, Betty," began Lloyd, impetuously, "I'm awfully sorry I made such a
mountain out of a mole-hill this mawning and got into a tempah about
what you said. You were right, aftah all. Ida thinks just as you do,
that we oughtn't to go off by ourselves all the time, and she wants to
be friends with the othah girls if they'll let her. I'm going back to
the old ways to-morrow, and try not to let anything spoil the good times
you talked about. Ida is so unhappy. I wish I could tell you, but I
haven't any right--what she told me was in confidence. But if you only
knew, you'd do all you could to help make it easiah for her with the
girls."

"I'll do anything on earth you want me to!" exclaimed Betty. "This has
been the longest, miserablest day I ever spent."

"Oh," cried the Little Colonel, a look of distress in her face. "Then
I've spoiled 'The Road of the Loving Heart' that I wanted to leave in
yoah memory. I haven't been true to my ring." She looked down at the
talisman on her finger, the little lover's knot of gold, and turned it
around regretfully.

"No, you haven't spoiled anything!" cried Betty. "It was my fault too.
You're the dearest girl in the world, and I'll always think of you that
way. Let's don't say another word about to-day. That's the best way to
forget."

Lloyd began undressing, and Betty knelt down to say her prayers. The
gong rang presently for all lights to be put out. The seminary settled
itself to silence, then to sleep. But long after Betty's soft, regular
breathing showed that she was in dreamland, Lloyd lay with wide-open,
wakeful eyes. The moonlight streaming through the open window lay in a
white square on the floor by her bed. She heard the clock in the hall
toll eleven, twelve, and one before she fell asleep. The spell of the
orchard was still upon her; the moonlight, the faint strains of music,
Ida's white face with the tears in the violet eyes, and the glimmer of
the pearl on her white hand came again and again in her fitful dreams,
all through the night.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SHADOW CLUB


LLOYD'S return to the old ways came about so naturally next morning,
that no one seemed to notice her sudden desertion of Ida. Just after the
morning recess began, little Elise Walton came running up to Allison,
crying excitedly, "Oh, sister! Give me your handkerchief! Quick!
Somebody has upset a bottle of ink on Magnolia Budine's hair, and it's
running all over everything!"

Before Allison could fish her handkerchief from her sleeve, where she
had thrust it during recitation, Lloyd seized a basin of water and
hurried out to the back hall door. There stood Magnolia, her head craned
forward like a turtle, as far as possible over the steps, to keep the
ink from dripping on her dress. Half a dozen little girls were making
excited passes at it with handkerchiefs, slate-rags, and sponges.

"Heah!" cried Lloyd, putting the basin down on the step. "Bend ovah,
Magnolia, and dip yoah head in! Anna Louise, you run and get anothah
basin in the hall, and Marguerite, ask some of the big girls to bring a
bucket of watah. It'll take a tubful to soak this out."

Whatever the Little Colonel undertook was thoroughly done, and when
Magnolia emerged from the last vigorous rinsing, only a faint green
tinge remained on the flaxen hair. But that would not wash off, Lloyd
declared. She had had a similar experience herself when she was in the
primary grade. It would simply have to wear off, and that process might
take days.

Kitty and Allison with all the girls of their set had crowded around to
see the amusing sight, offering advice and laughing all the time the
performance lasted. As she worked Lloyd related her own experience. Rob
Moore had tipped the bottle of ink on her head one day, when they were
writing letters to Santa Claus, and Mom Beck had washed her hair every
day for a week to get it out.

Finally, turning her charge over to the primary girls with a couple of
towels and directions to rub her dry and leave her in the sun to bleach,
Lloyd led the way to the swing, where they sat laughing and joking over
Magnolia's accident until the bell rang again.

The school had laughed at Magnolia from the first day, when an old
carryall stopped in front of the seminary and she climbed out with a
huge carpet-bag in her hand. It was the most old-fashioned of
carpet-bags, an elaborate pattern of red roses on each side. And she was
the most old-fashioned of little girls, buttoned up in a plain-waisted
bright blue merino dress, with many gathers in the full skirt. It was
such a dress as her grandmother might have worn when she was a child.
Her light hair was drawn back tightly behind her ears, and braided in
two little tails. She was fat and awkward and shy, and so awed by the
strange surroundings that a sort of terror took possession of her when
she found herself alone among so many unfamiliar faces.

It was Lloyd Sherman who came to the rescue when she saw tears of fright
in the round, blue eyes. Lloyd had begun the school term with a
resolution to keep true to the talisman she wore, the little ring that
was to remind her constantly of the "Road of the Loving Heart" which she
wanted to build in every one's memory. This was her first opportunity.
She led the little stranger to the principal's room, and stayed beside
her until she was delivered safely into the matron's hands. Later it was
Lloyd who saw her in chapel looking around in bewilderment, uncertain
where to go, and beckoned her to a seat near her own. And again at
roll-call, when somebody tittered at the unusual name, and the child's
face was all afire with embarrassment, Lloyd's friendly smile flashed
across to her was like a rope thrown to a drowning man, and she could
never forget to be grateful for it.

As she was in the primary department, she could only worship Lloyd from
afar during the day, but as rooms were assigned irrespective of classes,
and hers was in the same wing and on the same floor with Lloyd's, she
often left her door ajar in the evening, in the hope of seeing her pass,
or hearing her voice in the hall. Once she heard Ida call her Princess.
The name struck her fancy, and as "_The Princess_" Lloyd was henceforth
enshrined in her adoring little heart. Lloyd often caught her admiring
glances in chapel, and several times found little offerings in her desk
on Monday mornings, when the old carryall came back from the Budine farm
with the little girl and the huge carpet-bag.

There was an enormous red apple one time, polished to the highest degree
of shininess; several ears of pop-corn at another, and once a stiff
little bunch of magenta zinnias and yellow chrysanthemums. There was
never any name left with them. Lloyd guessed the giver, but she did not
realize what a large place she occupied in Magnolia's affections, or how
the child choked with embarrassment till she almost swallowed her
chewing-gum, whenever Lloyd chanced to meet her in the hall with a
friendly good morning.

"Let's go down to the playhouses and see if the green is bleaching out
of Magnolia's hair," proposed Lloyd at the afternoon recess, with all
her old-time heartiness; and again the girls forgot to wonder why she
stayed with them instead of wandering off with Ida to the orchard.

Just as they reached the spring a shout went up from the circle of
little girls gathered around Magnolia. She was facing them defiantly,
her fat little face red with mortification.

"What's the matter, Elise?" asked Allison, in a big-sister tone. "Why
are you all teasing Magnolia?"

"I'm not teasing her," cried Elise, indignantly. "I told her just now
not to mind anything they said, and I'd lend her my paper-doll bride to
play with till next Friday afternoon."

"She said that she learned to read in a graveyard, off of the
tombstones," giggled Anna Louise, "and it seemed so funny that we
couldn't help laughing."

Magnolia hung her head, twisting a corner of her apron in her fat little
fingers, and wishing that the earth would open and swallow her. She had
seen the amusement in the Little Colonel's face, and it hurt worse than
the ridicule of all the others combined. She felt that she must die of
shame.

"That's nothing to laugh at," said Betty, seeing the distress in her
face, and divining what the child was suffering. "I used to have lovely
times in the old graveyard at the Cuckoo's Nest. Don't you remember how
peaceful and sweet it was, Lloyd?" she asked, turning to the Little
Colonel, who nodded assent. "Davy and I used to walk up there every
afternoon in summer to smell the pinks and the lilies, and read what was
carved on the old stones. And we'd sit there in the grass and listen to
the redbirds in the cedars, and make up stories about all the people
lying there asleep. And Davy learned most of his letters there."

"That's the way it was at Loretta, wasn't it, Maggie!" exclaimed Elise,
encouragingly. "Tell them about it."

But Maggie hung her head and twisted the toes of her stubby shoes
around in the dust, unable to say a word.

"I'll tell them, then," said Elise, turning to the larger girls. "They
used to live near the convent at Loretta, and one of their neighbours, a
girl lots older than Maggie, used to take her up to the graveyard nearly
every day. There wasn't any place else to go, you know, and it was
lonesome out there in the country. This girl was named Corono, after one
of the Sisters who was dead. She had been awfully good to both their
families, when they were sick, and Corono and Maggie used to make
daisy-chains and crowns out of the honeysuckles and roses, 'cause Corono
means crown, and put them on her grave. And every time they would go,
Maggie would learn a new letter off one of the tombstones, and after
awhile she got so she could read."

"How interesting!" exclaimed Lloyd, all unconscious of the way her words
set Maggie's heart to beating with pleasure. Elise turned toward her
with a motherly air that seemed very funny considering that she was
smaller than the child whom she was championing so valiantly. "I'm going
to ask them about that album right now, Maggie. You run back to school
and get it."

Glad of any excuse to make her escape, Maggie started off to the house
as fast as her fat little legs would carry her. Deprived of their sport,
the smaller girls returned to their playhouses and the older ones
strolled leisurely back toward the seminary. Elise tagged along beside
Lloyd and Allison.

"Maggie has gone to get her autograph-album," she explained. "It used to
be her mother's when she went to school at the convent, but now it's
Maggie's. Not more than half the leaves are written on, and her mother
said she could use it if she'd be very careful. She wants you girls to
write in it. She has had it in her desk for two weeks, trying to get up
her courage to ask you, Lloyd, but she was afraid you would laugh. I
told her I wasn't afraid. _I'd_ ask you. She wants all the big girls to
write in it, but she said 'specially '_The Princess_.'"

"The Princess!" echoed Lloyd, in surprise.

"Yes, that's what she calls you all the time. 'Cause you were that in
the play, I suppose. She thinks you are the loveliest person she ever
saw, and says if she could just look like you and be like you for one
day, she'd die happy. And once"--Elise lowered her voice
confidentially--"she told me that when she says her prayers every night,
she always prays that some day she'll grow nice enough for you to like
her."

"The poor little thing!" cried Lloyd, much touched. "To think of her
caring like that! You tell her, Elise, that of co'se we'll all write in
it. I shall be glad to."

Elise ran on after Maggie, happy in the accomplishment of her kindly
assumed mission, and presently came back with the book which she left in
Lloyd's hands.

"Look, girls, what a funny old-fashioned thing it is!" cried Lloyd,
turning to Katie Mallard, who with Betty and Kitty were just behind
them. All the others came crowding around also.

"Heah is 'Album of the Heart' in gilt lettahs on the back, with such
funny plump little cupids sitting in the rose-wreath around it."

"And, oh, see!" cried Betty, glancing over her shoulder at the
delicately traced names of the gentle nuns, and the girls who had been
playmates of Maggie's mother in a far-away past. "They are all dated
over forty years ago."

"Of course," answered Katie. "Nobody is old-fashioned enough nowadays to
have an autograph-album. They are _so_ old-timey and out of date."

"Wait a minute, please," said Betty, as Lloyd slowly turned the leaves.
"What is that verse signed Sister Corono? Oh, it is an acrostic. See?
The initial letters of each line, read downward, spell Martha. That must
be Mrs. Budine's name."

Several voices read the verse in unison:

    "_M_ay thy life be ever led
     _A_long the path of duty,
     _R_ich in deeds of helpfulness,
     _T_hat fill sad hearts with beauty.
     _H_appiness shall then attend thee,
     _A_nd all the blessed saints befriend thee."

"Isn't that sweet?" cried Betty. "I'm going to write one for Magnolia.
There's something pathetic about that child to me. She looks so wistful
sometimes. She's dreadfully odd, but it's mean of the girls to laugh at
her."

"I'll do something extra nice, too," said Lloyd. "I can't write poetry,
but I'll copy a bar of music from one of the Princess Winsome songs. I
think notes look so pretty copied in pen and ink."

"I'll paint a magnolia blossom in water-colours," said Allison, not to
be outdone by the others.

"And I--oh, I'll draw a kitten for her to remember my name by," said
Kitty, laughing.

As both Allison and Kitty had real talent for drawing, the girls who saw
the pages they decorated were moved to envy; and when Betty added an
acrostic on the name Magnolia, nobody had a word of ridicule for the
little Album of the Heart, that was serving two generations as a
storehouse of sentiment. Betty's verse was passed around the school:

    "_M_ay our friendship be as sweet
     _A_s the flower whose name you bear.
     _G_irlhood days are fleet.
     _N_o others are half so fair.
     _O_ like a violet pressed,
     _L_et my name on this page long dwell,
     _I_n after years to recall
     _A_ schoolmate who wished you well."

When the girls read that, an autograph-album fever broke out in the
school. Every one came to Betty for an acrostic. She spent all her
playtime writing them. She ate all her meals struggling inwardly with
the hard initials in such names as Pinkie, Ursula, and Vashti. She even
dreamed rhymes in her sleep.

Lloyd copied music until her fingers ached, for everybody requested a
verse of a Princess Winsome song. Kitty drew whole colonies of kittens,
and Allison, finding it impossible to paint a flower typical of each
name presented, took to painting a single forget-me-not above her name.

The teachers, too, suffered from the epidemic, and even people outside
the school, until the principal found twenty-three letters in the
mail-bag one morning, all addressed to a well-known writer of juvenile
stories, whose books were the most popular in the school. An
investigation proved that because one girl had received his autograph,
twenty-three had followed her example in requesting it, and not one of
them had enclosed a stamp; nor had it occurred to them that an author's
time is too valuable to spend in answering questions, merely to satisfy
the idle curiosity of his readers.

"One stamp is of little value," said the principal, "but multiply it by
the hundreds he would have to use in a year in answering the letters of
thoughtless strangers, who have no claim on him in any way."
Twenty-three girls filed out into the hall after the principal's little
talk that followed, and slipped their letters from the mail-bag. Ten of
them threw theirs into the waste-basket. The others, who had asked no
questions and were more desirous of obtaining their favourite author's
autograph, opened theirs to enclose an envelope, stamped and addressed;
but few more letters of the kind went out from Lloydsboro Seminary after
that.

Kitty, Katie, Allison, Betty, and Lloyd all pounced upon Miss Edith one
morning before school, each with an album in her hand. Miss Edith
clutched her hair in mock despair. "These make the seventh dozen I have
been asked to write in this week," she declared. "Life is too short to
hunt up a different sentiment for each one. I must use the same verse
for everybody."

The girls perched on the desks around the rostrum, as she spread out the
books before her and began to write. They always loved the few moments
they could snatch in Miss Edith's room before school, and felt that her
autograph would be one of the most valuable in the collection.

"This is one of my favourite verses," said Miss Edith, as she passed the
blotter over the last page, and read it aloud:

    "This learned I from the shadow of a tree
     That to and fro did sway upon the wall:
     Our shadow-selves--our influence--may fall
     Where we can never be."

"I want to tell you a little incident that fastened it in my memory. I
have a friend teaching in one of the mountain schools of Kentucky, who
told me of two girls who came to the door one day, asking to be admitted
as students. Each carried a bundle of clothes wrapped in a newspaper.
That was all they had--no money to pay their tuition, no way of paying
their board unless they were allowed to work for it. They had walked
forty miles to get to that school. Their home was twice the distance
away, but their uncle, who was a tin pedlar, took them half-way in his
wagon. They were a week on the road after they left him, where his route
branched off from theirs. They stopped at night in some village or
farmhouse to which he directed them.

"Nobody had the heart to tell them that there was no room for students
who could not pay their way, neither could any one turn away such
ambition. But the school was poor. It is kept up by donations from
benevolent people, and it was only by great self-sacrifice that the
teachers could take them at all.

"The following vacation, while I was at the sea-shore, I had a letter
from this friend, and happened to speak of it and the two girls to a
wealthy lady whom I met there. She seemed so interested that I read her
my friend's letters. They were so full of the struggles and hardships of
those mountain people that she was greatly interested and touched, and
began corresponding with the principal of the school herself. The
outcome of it was that she sent a check for ten thousand dollars to
endow scholarships. Of course these two girls were the first to be
benefited by the gift, and next June they will be graduated from the
school with honour, fitted to become teachers themselves, far in advance
of the time it would have taken had they been obliged to work their way
through. Instead of plodding along, using the greater part of their time
and strength in laundry work or sewing, they could go on with the
college course uninterrupted. They are going to start a school
themselves in the mountains, nearer their own home.

"Now that lady never saw those girls, and they were as unconscious that
their influence was touching a life a thousand miles away as that tree
out yonder, throwing its shadow across on the Clovercroft lawn. They
simply stood in their places and reached out as far as they possibly
could after what was good and high and worthy in life; but for years and
years to come, students who profit by that endowment will be grateful
for the shadow cast by those two ambitious girls."

Miss Edith never preached. She did not go on to tell them, as Miss
McCannister would have done, that they were responsible not only for the
influence of their daily living upon others, but for the effect their
shadow-selves might cast on others far beyond their reach. She only
pointed to the flaming red leaves of a gum-tree outside the window, and
the shadow swaying partly on the high picket fence, and partly across
the Clovercroft lawn, then passed the albums back with a smile. Then the
girls filed slowly out to chapel.

It was a warm October day, and as Allison took her seat by an open
window in the history class an hour later, she found it hard to fix her
thoughts on the old French and Indian wars. It was so much pleasanter to
look with dreamy eyes through the haze of the Indian summer, which Mom
Beck said was the ghost-smoke from the peace-pipes of old dead and gone
chieftains.

She watched the slow fluttering to earth of the pale yellow maple
leaves, and listened to the soft rustling of the gorgeous red leaves on
the gum-tree to which Miss Edith had pointed. Once or twice she started,
recalling her thoughts to the history lesson with an effort as she
remembered the girls who were hungry enough for an education to walk
forty miles for it and work for their board. She thought vaguely how
eagerly they would have improved their opportunities had they been in
her place. They would have taken a lively interest in the old wars,
instead of sitting in idle day-dreams.

All at once, as Allison watched the swaying of the gum-tree's shadow on
the fence and lawn, a thought came to her that made her seize a pencil
and a piece of paper. Writing notes was forbidden in Miss McCannister's
classes, but Allison could not wait until recess to share her brilliant
thought with Lloyd. With her big eyes fixed innocently on Miss Bina's
fishy ones, she scribbled slowly on the paper without once looking down:
"_Let's form a Shadow Club, with Miss Edith's verse for a motto. A. W._"

It took much manoeuvring to succeed in passing the slip of paper to
Lloyd, who sat several seats in front. When it finally reached her she
did not dare turn round to nod a pleased assent, but Allison knew that
her suggestion was received favourably, for Lloyd's hand at once went up
to readjust the bow at the back of her hair, and two fingers wagged
violently for an instant out of Miss Bina's sight. Had it been her
thumb, Allison would have interpreted the signal to mean no; but from
the rapid wagging of the two fingers she knew that Lloyd was much
pleased with the idea.

Allison's plan, as she outlined it to Betty, Lloyd, and Kitty at recess,
in one of the swings, was to form a club that should be not only fun for
themselves, but of some real benefit to the girls of the mountain
districts. The Christmas before, the little circle of Busy Bees, to
which Elise belonged, had sent two barrels of clothes and toys to them,
under Mrs. Clelling's supervision. She had organized the circle, and was
deeply interested in the work. Now Allison proposed that the club should
earn money for the same purpose. She grew quite enthusiastic planning
the fair they could hold in the spring. "Kitty and I could paint
calendars and sachets and paper dolls, you know, Lloyd, and you and
Betty could embroider things."

"Katie Mallard crochets the cunningest little doll-caps you ever saw,"
suggested Kitty. "Of course we'll have her in it."

A warm glow came into the Little Colonel's heart. Here was her chance to
do something for Ida. "Let's have just a little bit of a club," she
urged; "not more than half a dozen. If we begin to invite generally,
it's impossible to draw the line where we can stop. We can't ask all the
school, for if we have refreshments, for so many, each meeting will be
like giving a big pa'hty. But half a dozen of us could get together
whenever we felt like it, and have the cosiest kind of a time with our
chafing-dishes, without the rest finding it out. Then nobody would feel
hurt."

"Here's four of us to begin with," said Kitty, "and if we have Katie
there's five. Shall you ask Corinne?"

"I wish we could," said Betty, "but that would leave Margery out, and it
would never do to ask them and not have Anna Louise and Marguerite. It
must be all or none in that crowd."

"I wish you all would be willing to ask Ida," said Lloyd, imploringly.
"She does such beautiful leather-work, and that brings better prices
than anything we can make."

"I am sure I'm willing," said Betty, cordially.

"I have no objection," said Allison, remembering the pleasant things Ida
had said about her, and Kitty, who cared little who was in the club or
out of it, so long as she had Katie Mallard, echoed her sister's
consent.

"As it is a Shadow Club, we'll keep dark about it," said Kitty. "The
girls need never know we've formed one. We ought to meet in the dark to
carry out the idea of its name. How would it do to have the haunted
house of Hartwell Hollow for our meeting-place?"

"Mercy, no!" exclaimed Lloyd, with a shiver. "That's too spooky, but if
you and Allison and Katie can make some excuse to spend the night at
the seminary some time, we'll have a midnight suppah."

"I think we might tell mother and Mrs. Mallard about the club," said
Allison. "They can keep a secret, and we'll have lots nicer times and
better refreshments if we let them into it."

"Well," agreed Lloyd, "but we mustn't let a single girl find it out.
They'd be mad as fiah to be slighted this way. Cross yoah heart and body
now, every one of you, that you'll not breathe it to a soul."

Three hands instantly imitated her solemn gesture.

"We'll have the first meeting at The Beeches," said Allison, "because I
got up the club. I'll get mother to telephone to the principal to let
you and Betty and Ida come over to supper Saturday."

Lloyd danced away to recitation so happy that her face fairly beamed.
She managed to spell across to Ida on her fingers that the invitation
she had coveted was hers at last.




CHAPTER V.

AT THE BEECHES


"HOW good it feels to be free!" exclaimed the Little Colonel, as she
pushed open the high green picket gate in front of the seminary, and
held it ajar for Ida to pass through.

"This is the first time that I have been out on the road without a
teachah and a flock of girls, for a whole month. I despise the way we
have to line up two by two and go mah'ching through the Valley as if we
were pah't of a circus parade, or inmates of an asylum, out for an
airing."

Ida laughed as they started down the path, along the road leading to The
Beeches. It was one of those perfect days in mid-October when it is easy
to laugh; when all outdoors seems filled to the brim with a great
content, and even the woods and fields, all autumn-clad, are keeping
holiday. Besides it was Saturday afternoon, and they were on their way
to their first club meeting.

This was their first appearance together since the night of their
stolen visit to the apple orchard, a week ago. It had cost Lloyd many a
pang to give up her intimacy with Ida, but she had never shown such
unselfishness as she did in this devotion to her friend. Since Ida's
interests demanded that she should go off with the other girls no matter
how much she longed to stay, she went obediently. Although Ida no longer
wore her violets, she kept her room sweet with fresh bunches of them.
Although her name was constantly in her thoughts, she rarely mentioned
it, even to Betty. A few whispered words in the hall, an adoring glance
toward her now and then at the table, was all she could snatch in the
daytime. She even allowed the school to surmise what it pleased; that
Ida had quarrelled with her or had grown tired of her; for her love was
of the kind that "endureth all things." But every night she lay awake,
living over that scene in the moonlit orchard, happy in the
consciousness that she was making Ida happy, and dreaming of the romance
that she was helping on its way.

Betty had hurried on up the road to call by for Katie Mallard, with the
agreement that the couple which reached the post-office first should
wait there for the other.

"Let's cut through Clovercroft," suggested Lloyd.

"Mrs. Marks won't care, and it is much shortah that way. The path below
her ice-house will bring us out at her woodland gate, just across the
road from the depot."

"Anything to get to the post-office first," agreed Ida. "I'm sure that
there'll be a letter in your box for me to-day. I can just _feel_ that
there's one there."

From the depot it was but a few steps to the post-office. One had only
to cross the road, pass the country store, and stroll a short distance
along the shady avenue. There it sat by the wayside, a little box of a
room, that always made Lloyd think of a dove-cote; for the first time
she had been taken there her grandfather had explained that all the
little square places where Miss Mattie was putting the letters were
pigeonholes. Presently when Miss Mattie opened the window and handed him
a letter from one of those places, she cried out with a little squeal of
delight which made every one smile, "Oh, white pigeon wing flied out fo'
you, grandfathah!"

Afterward it grew to be a byword that they always used between
themselves, when one carried home a letter for the other. "Pigeon wing
for grandpa's baby," he would call fondly, even when she had grown to
be a tall girl; and "White pigeon wing flied out fo' you, grandfathah
deah," was the cry if she were the bearer of the missive.

From the post-office door, looking across the road to a grassy ridge
beyond, one could see the big inn that the year before had been turned
into a home for old Confederate soldiers. Farther on was the wide green
slope of the churchyard, and the little stone church with its
ivy-covered belfry. The manse stood just behind it. Next to that was the
cottage with the high green gables and diamond-shaped window-panes,
where the Waltons had lived one summer while their new house was being
built. And next to the cottage was the new house itself, set away back
in the great grove of trees which gave to the place the name of "The
Beeches."

Ida stood outside the door while Lloyd went in for the mail. She was
afraid that Miss Mattie might suspect that she had an interest in the
letters if she went in too, so she busied herself in looking for
four-leaf clovers along the path. She could not have seen one, however,
had they been growing on every grass-blade, she was in such a nervous
flutter of expectancy. When Lloyd came out with two letters in her hand,
her face flushed crimson at sight of the familiar handwriting on one
envelope.

"This is mine," she exclaimed, in a low tone, snatching it eagerly.
"Let's sit down here on the step while I read it."

"I'm mighty glad it wasn't the only one," said Lloyd, glancing back over
her shoulder to see if Miss Mattie still stood at the delivery-window.
Peeping through the glass which covered the partition wall of
pigeonholes, Lloyd saw that she had gone back to her desk by the rear
window. So she continued, in a low tone:

"Suppose that had been the only letter, and Betty had asked me if I got
one?"

"You would have said no, of course," said Ida, looking up from the page,
impatient at the interruption. "This is not for you."

"But it is addressed to me," persisted Lloyd. "Suppose Miss Mattie heard
me say no to such a question, or that Betty saw me take it out of the
box?"

Again Ida looked up impatiently, but seeing the distressed expression of
Lloyd's face, said, soothingly, "I know what you are thinking, Princess.
It has just occurred to you that your helping me to carry on this
correspondence under cover of your name seems a little bit underhanded.
But if you could just read this letter you'd never be troubled by such a
thought again. It makes me feel that I am carrying out the motto of our
club in the very highest way possible.

    "'Our shadow-selves--our influence--may fall
     Where we can never be.'"

she quoted, softly, looking dreamily away toward the ivy-grown belfry.

"I cannot be with Edwardo, but at least half of this letter is taken up
with telling me how much my letters have helped and influenced him. That
the thought of me off here, true to him in spite of all that has been
done to separate us, is keeping him straight as nothing else could do.
Somehow it seems a good omen for the club that I should get such a
letter on my way to the first meeting."

Ida's manner was convincing, and Lloyd's face brightened as she
listened, but she breathed more freely when she saw the envelope bearing
her name torn into little bits too small to tell tales, and dropped down
the crack behind the doorstep.

Betty and Katie joined them presently, and two by two they rustled along
through the fallen leaves which filled the path, to The Beeches. Long
before three o'clock the six members of the Shadow Club were assembled
around the big table in the dining-room, with their materials spread out
for Mrs. Walton's inspection. Piles of brightly coloured tissue-paper,
embroidery silks, zephyr, and ribbon, made a gay showing. Mrs. Walton
entered into their plans for the fair enthusiastically, as she helped
wind a skein of Iceland wool for Katie's crocheting.

"The beauty of this club," remarked Kitty, as she opened her paint-box
and carefully selected a brush, "is that there's no fuss and feathers
about it. No election of officers, no dues, no rules, no tiresome
minutes to read. All we have to do when we begin is to begin."

"And to remember our motto," suggested Betty, to whom the purpose of the
club appealed strongly.

"Ida has made something to help us do that," said Lloyd. "Give them to
us now, Ida, while Mrs. Walton is here to see them, please," she urged.

Ida, who had delayed showing them for that very reason, glanced shyly
toward her hostess, and then hesitatingly opened the case which held her
pyrography outfit.

"It's only some little blotting-pads for your writing-desks," she said,
with a blush. "It seems to me that the verse is especially appropriate
at letter-writing time, when we consciously cast our shadow-selves
where we cannot be."

There was a chorus of delighted exclamations as she passed the packages
around. Only two narrow slips of white blotting-paper held together by a
white silken cord, but the cover was of soft gray kid, on which she had
burned with her pyrography needle the club's motto in old English
letters. Mrs. Walton leaned over the table to read the one on Allison's:

    "=This learned I from the shadow of a tree
      That to and fro did sway upon a wall,
      Our shadow-selves--our influence--may fall
      Where we can never be.="

"It is beautifully done, my dear," she exclaimed, smiling down into the
shy violet eyes raised gratefully to hers in acknowledgment of her
lavish praise. "The club is certainly to be congratulated on having a
member who can not only make such pretty things, but who can think of
such sweet, suggestive ways in which to keep its purpose always in
view."

Lloyd's hand, groping along under the table, found Ida's and gave it a
squeeze of sympathetic delight.

"There's something to write to your aunt," she whispered. While the
girls were still admiring their blotters, the maid came in to announce
a visitor for Mrs. Walton in the library.

Several minutes after she had left them to themselves, Kitty exclaimed,
"Oh, mamma forgot to give me those little brass clamps to fasten the
candle-shades, and now she has company, and I haven't the faintest idea
where to look for them."

"They may be in the hat-rack drawer in the hall," suggested Allison. "I
think I saw them in there this morning, but I am not sure."

Kitty skipped out of the room to look for them, and a few minutes later
came back, her black eyes shining teasingly.

"I have a trade-last for you, Ida," she said. "Mrs. Mallard is in the
library, discussing our club, and I heard mother say something awfully
nice about you."

"Tell it!" demanded Lloyd.

"No, I said a trade-last."

"Oh, fishing for a compliment!" sang Katie. "Don't tell her, Ida, even
if you have heard one. It will make her vain."

"Besides," put in Allison, "Miss Bina McCannister said it was common and
silly to play trade-last."

"Oh, bother old Miss Bina!" said the disrespectful Kitty. "Well, I'll
tell you, anyhow. I heard mother tell Mrs. Mallard that she thought you
were a charming girl, one of the sweetest that she had met in a long
time. She said she was glad we had chosen you in the club instead of a
younger girl, for she thought you would have a quieting, refining
influence on us, especially _me_! Think of that now! Me! And she said on
that account she would like to have you here often."

Again Lloyd's hand met Ida's under the table in a quick squeeze.
"Something else to write to your aunt," she whispered.

Several pretty candle-shades, two doll tam-o'-shanter caps, and three
calendars in water-colours were laid aside finished, as the result of
that afternoon's work. Besides, Lloyd and Betty had each made
considerable progress on the centrepieces they had undertaken to
embroider, and the magazine-cover Ida was burning in an elaborate design
of dragons was half-done. Allison packed the finished articles away in a
hat-box after supper, and put them up on a shelf in her closet.

"Our first meeting has surely been a success," she exclaimed. "At this
rate we'll have enough things made by Easter to hold a splendid big
fair. We ought to be able to cast our shadows quite a distance with the
money we'll make, if we do this well every time."

"Come cast your shadows on this sheet, girls," called Mrs. Walton from
the next room, where she had pinned some strips of white paper to a
sheet hung on the wall, and placed a lamp at the proper distance for
making silhouettes. "The name of your club suggested an old amusement of
ours. Come, see how clever you are at drawing each other's shadows."

It proved to be an amusing undertaking, for whenever they laughed during
the process, it changed their profiles into all sorts of ridiculous
outlines. But finally some very creditable silhouettes were made, and
each member of the club carried home her own shadow as a souvenir of the
first meeting.

Katie's father called for her at half-past eight, and escorted the
seminary girls as far as the high green gate.

"What a perfectly lovely time we've had!" exclaimed Betty, as she and
Lloyd and Ida strolled slowly on toward the house, when they had bidden
Katie and Mr. Mallard good night.

"And what a delicious suppah we had!" sighed Lloyd. "Oh, if we could
only have shaded candles, and pretty silvah, and flowahs at
bo'ding-school! I'm so tiahed of that long bare table. Everything
tasted so good to-night. Those deah little beaten biscuit made me
homesick. I haven't had any since I left Locust."

"The club is certainly an inspiration to do something and be something
worth while," said Betty. "What Mrs. Walton said at supper, and
afterward when she was showing us the general's sword, made me feel that
way. Somehow, to-night, the world seems so much lovelier to be in than
ever it did before; so full of opportunities, when one little person can
cast such a tremendously long shadow." She looked back at hers,
stretching down the path behind her, in the light from the hall lamp,
till it seemed the length of a giant.

They passed on into the house, and up the stairs together. As Betty went
ahead to light the lamp in their room, Ida caught Lloyd impetuously
around the waist and gave her a grateful hug.

"Oh, Princess," she exclaimed, "I've had such a happy day, and I owe it
all to you! If it hadn't been for you I'd have had neither the visit to
The Beeches nor Edwardo's letter. You're _such_ a comfort!"




CHAPTER VI.

UNINVITED GUESTS


"THIS is the last day of October," announced Betty, one morning, tearing
a leaf from the calendar, as was her habit as soon as she finished
dressing. "To-night will be Hallowe'en."

"Do you realize," answered Lloyd, "that we have been at school six whole
weeks without doing a single thing we had planned? We have been
painfully good. Yestahday when I passed the music-room where Professah
Steinwig was giving a violin lesson, I heard him say, 'Ach, you must let
down der strings when you have feenish playing. If you keep him keyed to
von high pitch alway, some day bif! He go break!' That's just the way I
feel this morning; that I've been thinking so much about my shadow-self,
and the work we've undehtaken for the mountain people, that it's kept me
keyed up to too high a pitch of goodness. I've got to let down and get
into some sort of mischief, or bif! I'll go break!"

Betty laughed. "Maybe the changes in the atmosphere affect people as
well as fiddle-strings, and it is because it's Hallowe'en, and witches
are in the air, that you feel so."

It may have been that the faculty were of Betty's opinion, and felt the
spell lurking in the atmosphere. Warned by some mysterious "pricking of
the thumbs" of coming wickedness, they sought to avert it. It was
announced at breakfast that the usual rules would be suspended that
night, and that from seven until eleven the resident pupils would be at
liberty to observe the customs of Hallowe'en anywhere in the building,
and that a spread of nuts, gingerbread, and apples would be furnished in
the gymnasium.

"Headed off again!" exclaimed one of the larger girls who sat near
Lloyd. "It's good of them to grant us such privileges, but we won't have
half the fun that we could have had if they hadn't put us on our honour
this way. I had planned to slip out and go over to Julia Ferris's
to-night. Some of the cadets from the Lyndon military school are coming
up. I wouldn't have hesitated a moment if they had shut down on our
having some fun here, but now they've treated us so handsomely, even to
furnishing a spread, of course I can't go. Hallowe'en is stupid with
just a lot of girls--the same old set we've been going with straight
along."

"We might have a masquerade," suggested Susie Figgs. "That would make us
feel as if we were meeting strangers."

The suggestion ran along the table like wild-fire, and was so
enthusiastically received that Susie felt herself a public benefactor,
and beamed with importance the rest of the day.

"Oh, what shall _I_ go as?" was the despairing question immediately
heard in every quarter, for the time was short in which to improvise
costumes. The matron was besieged by distracted borrowers with requests
for everything, from a blanket for Pocahontas, to a sunshade and
watering-pot for "Mistress Mary, quite contrary."

Lloyd's costume cost her little trouble aside from borrowing a horn from
one of the children in the neighbourhood; for Mom Beck, coming in with
the laundry before school, volunteered her services. In an old chest in
the linen-room at Locust were many odds and ends left over from private
theatricals and fancy-dress occasions. Mom Beck remembered an old blue
velvet skirt that she thought could be made into a suit for Little Boy
Blue before night, if Aunt Cindy's daughter would help her with the
knickerbockers, and hurried away to begin, carrying Lloyd's measure and
a Zouave jacket belonging to one of her summer suits, for a pattern.

From that same chest came a dress and hat which Mrs. Sherman had worn in
a tableau years before as a Dresden shepherdess, which transformed Betty
into the prettiest little Bo-Peep that could be imagined.

Allison and Kitty, taking advantage of the relaxed rules, slipped up the
stairs before going home after school, to look at the costumes lying
spread out on Lloyd's bed.

"I think it's a shame that day pupils can't come, too," said Allison,
wrathfully. "We're left out all around, for we're not old enough to be
invited to Julia Ferris's party. We were going to have a party at our
house, but mother and auntie had to go to town to stay all night. Aunt
Elise is entertaining some old army officer's wife. So we can't have any
fun."

"Don't you think that for a moment!" exclaimed Kitty. "Mrs. Mallard said
that Katie might come and stay all night with us. Mother telephoned to
her just before she started to town."

A daring thought popped into Lloyd's mind. "Why don't you come to-night?
It's a masquerade. You could slip in heah to our room befoah they
unmask, and nobody would evah find out who you were. It couldn't be moah
fortunately arranged. Little Elise is in town with yoah mothah, and you
could easily slip away from Barbry and the cook. You could sleep in heah
with us, and run home early in the mawning befoah anybody was up. I'll
unlock the doah at the head of the outside stairs, and you can sneak in
back way while we are at suppah."

"Oh, how I'd love to!" began Allison, "but I'm sure that mother and Mrs.
Mallard wouldn't like it, and--"

"Now, Allison," interrupted Kitty, "you know that nobody ever told us
_not_ to come, did they? It wouldn't be disobeying unless we'd been
forbidden."

"All sorts of larks are allowed on Hallowe'en," urged Lloyd. "Not a soul
outside of the Shadow Club will know who you are, and it will be such
fun to set everybody to guessing who you are and where you've gone, when
you suddenly disappear."

"Yes, we'll come," said Kitty, seizing Allison by the waist and dancing
her toward the door. "I'll take the blame if there is any. Hurry up, old
Grandma Prim, we'll have to hustle. We've barely time to run home and
eat our supper and get dressed and back here before the affair begins."

Kitty's enthusiasm, like an energetic young whirlwind, swept away every
objection her sister could offer, and a few minutes later they were on
their way home, eagerly discussing with Katie Mallard what costumes they
could get ready in an hour.

Lloyd, who had followed them to the head of the stairs, turned back to
her room with a naughty thrill of enjoyment. This escapade would add a
spice of excitement to the evening, and she already tingled with the
anticipation of it. There was a mischievous smile on her face as she
walked down the hall. But it disappeared as she caught the muffled sound
of some one sobbing. She stood still to listen. It seemed to come from
Magnolia Budine's room, the door of which stood ajar.

Since the day that the old autograph-album had been put into her hands,
Lloyd had felt a peculiar interest in the child who prayed every night
that some day she might "grow nice enough for the Princess to like her."
She had showed this interest by many little attentions which kept
Magnolia in a flutter of happiness for hours afterward. Although she
still coloured with embarrassment to the roots of her flaxen hair when
the Princess stooped to speak to her, she no longer choked and
swallowed her chewing-gum. In fact, she no longer chewed, since she
noticed that the Princess disdained the habit.

It was Elise who confided this fact to Lloyd, and many other things
which not only flattered her vanity, but aroused a real affection for
the ardent little soul who showed her admiration by copying her in every
way possible.

"She looks up to me as I look up to Ida," thought Lloyd. "I ought to be
good to the poor little thing."

As she paused an instant in the hall, wondering whether it would be
kinder to go in and offer comfort or to go away showing no sign of
having overheard her sobs, it suddenly occurred to her what was the
cause of Magnolia's grief. Probably she had no costume for the
masquerade. Nothing the huge carpet-bag held could be made into one.
There was no one to help her, and she felt left out of the Hallowe'en
frolic. Lloyd hesitated no longer. The next moment she was wiping
Magnolia's eyes, and restoring her to her usual blushing cheerfulness.

"I'll tell you what we'll do," she said. "We'll run over to Clovercroft,
and ask Miss Katherine to lend us something. I have to go, anyhow, to
borrow a horn. Mrs. Marks told me that I could have one that Buddy left
there last summah. He's one of her grandchildren. Miss Katherine is an
artist. She has a great big camera in her studio, and takes bettah
pictuahs than any professional photographah could, because she thinks of
all sorts of beautiful things to pose people for. She gets a medal or a
prize every time she places a pictuah on exhibition, and I'm suah she
can think of something for you to be."

In such a state of rapture that she felt she must be dreaming, Magnolia
followed Lloyd down-stairs to ask the principal's permission to go over
to Clovercroft.

"I know a place where there are two pickets loose," said Lloyd, as they
hurried across the lawn. "If you can squeeze through the fence we'll
save time. Every minute is precious now."

Breathless and panting from their run, the children reached the side
door just as the coloured man opened it on his way out for an armful of
wood.

"Frazer, we want to see Miss Katherine," announced Lloyd, who was enough
at home at Clovercroft to know all the servants.

"She's in the music-room, Miss Lloyd," he answered. "You all kin walk
right in."

"Is there any company there? We want to see her alone," said Lloyd,
with a dignified air that made Magnolia look at her admiringly.

"No'm, jes' she an' her maw, listenin' to Miss Flora play." He held the
door open for them to enter, and motioned toward the music-room door,
which stood ajar. A bright fire blazed on the white tiled hearth. On one
side sat a gentle, sweet-faced lady in black; "Buddy's grandmother,"
thought Magnolia, as she noticed her gray hair. On the other side, on a
low stool, with her hands clasped over her knees, sat Miss Katherine,
looking into the embers. The firelight shone on her red dress, and cast
a rosy glow to every part of the cheerful room. Both were listening so
intently to the soft nocturne that Miss Flora was playing, that Lloyd's
knock made them start with surprise.

"Well, well! It's the Little Colonel!" exclaimed the lady in black,
holding out her hand to welcome her. "Come up to the fire, my dear. Both
of you." She smiled reassuringly at Magnolia, who leaned against a chair
by the door, staring around her with big blue eyes, like a frightened
kitten.

Lloyd plunged into her story at once, for the time was too short to
stand on ceremony. At the mention of costumes Miss Katherine was all
attention, and turned to Magnolia with critical interest.

"Suppose you take her hair out of those tight little tails," she
suggested "and let me see how long it is."

Lloyd obeyed instantly, and the soft, light hair, released from its
plaits, stood out in a short, frizzy crop, reaching only a little below
her collar. It was very becoming. Lloyd was amazed at the change it made
in the child's appearance.

"The very thing I want for my Knave of Hearts!" cried Miss Katherine,
clasping her hands enthusiastically, and turning toward her mother. "I
am illustrating that old jingle about the Queen of Hearts who made some
tarts upon a summer day. I've a lovely picture for the queen, but I
haven't been able to find a suitable boy for the knave 'who spied those
tarts and stole them all away.' But there she stands. Her hair is
exactly the right length, and she's so fat and cute that if I can just
get her to roll those round blue eyes the way I want them, it will make
a perfect love of a picture."

"But the costume," suggested Mrs. Marks. "It is so elaborate, and the
time is short."

Miss Katherine looked at the clock. "One can do wonders in an hour," she
said, and burying her face in her hands a moment, she thought intently.

"Genius burns," she announced in a moment, looking up at her sister.
"Where's that little white duck suit that Lucien outgrew and left here
one summer? I saved it for just such an emergency. I'm sure it will fit
her."

"Packed away in the tower-room," answered Miss Flora. "I know just where
to put my hand on it, though. Is there anything else you want while I am
up there?"

"Yes, some scraps of red velvet if there are any left in the piece-bag.
I have everything else we'll need, in the studio. That red canton
flannel I sometimes use for draping backgrounds, will make a long
flowing cape to hang from the back of his neck and sweep the ground
behind him."

Magnolia felt as if she were a big doll as she was handed around from
one to another in the trying on process, when Miss Flora came back with
the suit. It did fit her passably well, and she and Lloyd were set to
work at once, cutting out dozens of red velvet hearts.

"Makes me think of the time that I was the Queen of Hearts at Gingah's
valentine pah'ty, and the old bear that the boys tied to the bedpost
frightened us neahly to death," said Lloyd.

Snip, snip went both pair of scissors, and as fast as the hearts were
cut, Miss Katherine and Miss Flora sewed them on to the little white
duck blouse and knickerbockers. Even Mrs. Marks helped, fastening frills
of black ribbon and great gilt buckles on some old red house-slippers of
Buddy's. It grew dark while they worked. Frazer lighted the lamps and
piled more wood on the fire, and Lloyd began to think uneasily that the
supper-bell would be ringing at the seminary soon.

But in shorter time than seemed possible, everything was done. When
Magnolia was led to the long hall mirror to look at herself, she was
unable to believe that what she saw was her own reflection. It looked
like some bright-coloured illustration taken from a lovely picture-book.

Red hearts dotted the white duck suit, and white hearts the long red
cape which trailed gracefully from her shoulders. A funny little crown
copied in red and white pasteboard from the one they found on the Jack
of Hearts in a deck of cards, rested on the short, light hair, curling
up around her ears. There were lace ruffles at her wrists, and a tin
sword at her side, and in her outstretched hands a little pie-tin,
borrowed from the cook.

"Turn your head to one side, as if you were looking over your shoulder,"
commanded Miss Katherine, "and hold the tart up high in front. Now lift
your feet and sway back as if you were cake-walking. There, mamma, isn't
that a perfect reproduction of the picture in our old Mother Goose? I'm
charmed!"

The dropping of the tight-waisted, old-fashioned blue dress for this
story-book attire changed the child's appearance so completely that she
looked into the mirror half-frightened, feeling that her old self had
run away from her. But there were Mrs. Marks and Miss Flora exclaiming
"How pretty!" and the Princess clapping her hands and fluttering around
her, calling out that she was perfectly lovely, and made the darlingest
little Knave of Hearts that ever was seen, and Miss Katherine saying
that if she would come over the next day at noon she would take her
photograph.

No one had even called her pretty before, and she had never had her
picture taken. Her eyes sparkled and her face lighted up as she turned
again to the mirror.

"You and Betty come over to-morrow, too," said Miss Katherine to Lloyd,
as she buttoned up the blue dress again, so that Magnolia could go back
to supper. "I'd like to add Boy Blue and Bo-Peep to my Mother Goose
gallery."

It was dark when Lloyd and Magnolia squeezed through the fence again and
ran up the stairs to the room. As Lloyd passed the portière at the end
of the hall she pushed it aside and drew back the bolt, as she had
promised Kitty to do. They had barely time to lay their bundles on
Magnolia's bed when the supper-bell rang, and they ran down to the
dining-room. Lloyd was all aglow with excitement and pleasure over the
success of the last hour's work, but Magnolia had shrunk back into the
same timid little creature she was before her transformation. She had
put her hair back into the tight little tails again before leaving
Clovercroft, so that her disguise would be the more complete when she
unloosed it and appeared as the little knave.

Meantime, Allison and Kitty, hurrying home with their guest, had
delighted Norah by a demand for early supper. She and Barbry were
expecting some friends from Rollington, a little Irish village near the
Valley, and would be glad to be through with their work an hour earlier
than usual.

"And you needn't light up for us down-stairs, except in the
dining-room," said Allison, "for we're going straight to our rooms after
supper, and we don't want to be disturbed till to-morrow morning."

"Very well, miss," answered Barbry, who, a middle-aged woman, was the
most trustworthy of well-trained maids. Mrs. Walton never felt any
hesitancy in leaving the children in her care.

"And--oh, Barbry," said Allison, as she turned to leave the room.
"To-night is Hallowe'en, and they say the witches are out and ghosts
rise out of their graves. What is that tale they tell about a ghost that
used to be seen about the seminary grounds?"

"Sure, an' your mother would be afther gettin' angry if I filled your
heads with such nonsense. Who said there was ever a ghost at all in the
Valley?"

But after much teasing Barbry allowed herself to be persuaded into
telling a tale that had been afloat for years, of the little woman in
gray who had once owned the land on which the seminary was built. She
lived all alone, and was an odd character. Her peculiar mode of living,
and the mystery surrounding her death, gave rise to the rumour that her
spirit still haunted the seminary grounds. It was said that the little
woman never appeared in public without a gray veil, and her wraith was
recognized by the long gauzy covering floating loosely back from its
face, not gray but white, as more becoming a spirit.

No sooner had Barbry finished her tale than Allison beckoned the girls
to follow, and led the way up-stairs to the sewing-room. "I thought at
first I'd just put a pillow-case over my head and wrap up in a sheet,
but I'm going to make the girls think I'm the real article. How will
this do?"

Taking a roll of cotton from one of the shelves, she pinned it over her
hair to make a short white wig, powdered her face till it was as white
as the cotton, and over it all threw a long piece of tulle, which she
brought from a bureau drawer in her room. "Aunt Elise gave it to me last
time I was in town," she said. "She had yards and yards of it that had
been used some way in decorating with lilies for a luncheon. Wait till I
wrap a sheet around me. Now how do I look?"

"Perfectly awful!" exclaimed Kitty, gazing at her in fascinated wonder
that flesh and blood could look so truly ghost-like. Katie hid her eyes
with a little scream.

"Don't look at me that way," she begged. "If you are this terrifying in
daylight to people who know who you are, what will you be at night?"

Well satisfied with the effect she had produced, Allison folded up the
veil, carefully removed the wig, and washed the powder from her face,
while Kitty and Katie rummaged in the drawers for some old,
long-sleeved gingham aprons that had been discarded long ago. They had
decided to go as rag dolls, as that would be the most complete disguise
they could think of. Even their hair would be covered, and they would
not need to speak.

"It will be terribly hot with all that cotton stuffed about our heads
and necks," said Katie. "But we'll look _so_ funny. And we must hold
ourselves limp and lean up against things or flop over, just as real rag
dolls do."

"Here are the aprons," cried Kitty, at last. "See? They'll fit up close
around the neck and hide the place where the muslin that covers our head
is tied on."

"I'll paint the faces on you the last thing before we start," said
Allison.

"Mercy me! Allison!" exclaimed Katie. "We can't walk down past the depot
and the store rigged up that way, even if it is dark. Somebody might
think we were escaped freaks, and chase us. We ought to wait till we get
to the seminary before we dress."

"No, there won't be time then, and everybody will know it's only a
Hallowe'en frolic. If Kitty wears her golf-cape and you wear mine, and
pull the hoods away over your faces, nobody will notice. I'll not dress
till afterward, for I'm not going to appear till the middle of the
evening. I'm not going to go up to the gymnasium at all, but just glide
around on the outskirts and lay a cold finger on some one now and then.
I'll get a lump of ice out of the cooler if I can manage to slip into
the dining-room. Now if you'll bring me the scissors I'll cut the muslin
and fit it over your heads."

Mrs. Walton, sorry that her absence would deprive the girls of their
anticipated Hallowe'en party, compensated for their disappointment as
far as possible by ordering an unusually delicious little supper for
them and their guest.

"Isn't it too tantalizing!" exclaimed Kitty, when Barbry had left the
room for some hot biscuits. "Here's everything I like best, and I'm in
such a hurry and so excited that I can hardly choke down a mouthful."

"Don't talk, then," commanded Allison. "Just _eat_!"

The meal proceeded in silence for a few moments, but the silence itself
grew funny as they thought of the ludicrous figures they would soon
present, and they began to giggle.

The giggles grew into shrieks of laughter a little later, when they had
gone up-stairs, and the two rag dolls, all stuffed, painted, and
dressed, leaned limply against the wall and leered at each other. Even
their hands looked comical, covered in white woollen gloves, each finger
held stiffly out from the other. After one glance Allison rolled on the
bed, holding her sides, laughing and gasping in turn.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" she exclaimed, finally, sitting up and wiping her
eyes and then going off into a fresh paroxysm of laughter as she looked
at them again. "I never saw anything so funny in my life. The girls will
simply shriek when they see you."

Norah and Barbry, sitting over their own supper, heard the laughing far
down in the kitchen. They looked at each other and smiled, and then, as
the contagious sound continued, laughed themselves. The merriment was
irresistible. But a little later, busy with their preparations for their
coming friends, they did not notice that the house grew strangely still,
and that not another sound came from the rooms above all that evening.

Kitty's room adjoined Allison's. Bolting the door which opened into her
mother's, on the inside, she passed through Allison's with Katie, and
out into the hall. Then Allison locked her door on the outside and hid
the key under the hall rug. Creeping down the stairs, they stole out at
the side door, locked it after them, and hid the key inside a large
flower-pot on the porch.

"That's safer than carrying it," said Allison. "We'd be sure to lose it,
and then we would be in a pretty pickle."

The moon, overcast by shifting clouds, was just beginning to throw a
faint, ghostly glimmer over the Valley as the girls hurried out.

"Let's go back way until we are past grandmother's gate," said Kitty.
Edgewood, Mrs. MacIntyre's place, was just across from The Beeches, and
some one was strolling up the avenue toward it. "Uncle Harry," whispered
Allison, crouching down in the shadow of a tree until he had gone in.

Rustling along in the dry leaves, they passed the rear of the cottage
next door, the manse, and the little stone church. That brought them out
into the wide, open space below the ridge, where the lights gleamed from
every window in the Soldiers' Home. The girls drew their hoods closer
over their faces as they hurried across the churchyard, out through the
iron gate into the road.

"It makes me think of the night we had a Hallowe'en party at the haunted
house of Hartwell Hollow," said Katie, looking up at the bare branches
overhead, which were beginning to toss in the rising wind. Then she
clapped a white-gloved hand over her rag mouth to choke back a giggle.
Kitty had begun holding her arms in the aimless fashion peculiar to rag
dolls, and was walking along as if she had no bones.

"For goodness' sake, behave yourself," begged Allison. "Don't get us to
laughing out here on the road!"

Kitty straightened up as they passed the deserted post-office, and they
quickened their pace until they were safely beyond the store and the
depot. A moment later they had passed through the woodland gate of
Clovercroft, raced along the path below the ice-house, and were
squeezing through the gap in the picket fence to the seminary grounds.

"They must be almost through supper," whispered Katie, peeping in at one
of the dining-room windows, over which the blind had not been entirely
drawn. "With all that laughing and talking they'll never hear us go up
the stairs. We can make as much noise as we please."

A dim light burned in the upper hall, but no lamp was lighted in Betty
and Lloyd's room.

"Let's not make any," suggested Allison. "They'll think we haven't
come. Let's hide and see what they do when they suddenly discover us."

As she spoke there was a sound of many feet in the lower hall, then on
the stairs, and an unusual buzz of voices. The girls were scattering to
their rooms to dress for the masquerade.

"Hurry!" gasped Allison, stooping down behind a tall rocking-chair.
Kitty rolled under one bed and Katie under the other, and there they lay
waiting, trying to stifle the giggles which nearly choked them.




CHAPTER VII.

THE HALLOWE'EN MASQUERADE


"I'LL make a light," said Betty, groping across the room with a handful
of matches which she had taken from the box in the hall. Lloyd started
to follow, but, stumbling over a footstool, felt her way to the bed and
sat down on the edge of it to wait for a light. On the way up from
supper she had started to repeat a funny story which she had heard at
Clovercroft that afternoon, and she kept on with it as Betty, having
found her way to the table, struck a match. But she stopped again, as
the match went out with a sudden puff, as if a strong draught had blown
it.

"There! It never fails to do that when I'm in a hurry," exclaimed Betty,
striking another match as she spoke. It was extinguished as suddenly as
the first. She tried another and another with the same result.

"How strange!" she said, wonderingly. "There isn't a window open
anywhere, is there?"

"It's the witches," declared Lloyd, laughing. "There must be one
standing there by yoah elbow."

The laugh ended in a piercing shriek as she felt something clutch her
ankle. "Murdah! Murdah!" she yelled. "Ow! There's something awful undah
the bed! It grabbed me by the foot! Ow! Ow!"

"Hush up, goosey!" commanded a familiar voice, and as Betty struck her
fifth and last match, which burned steadily, they saw Allison dashing to
the door to lock it. Doors were opening all along the corridors, and
footsteps hurrying from every direction in response to Lloyd's terrified
cry.

"Tell them that it's all right! That it's only a Hallowe'en scare,"
demanded Allison, in a stage whisper. "Don't let them in. I blew out the
matches, and it's only Kitty and Katie under the beds."

"It's all right," called Lloyd, in a quavering tone, but the matron's
knock was imperative, and Betty, beckoning the girls frantically toward
the closet, fumbled with the bolt until they had whisked into hiding.
The one brief glimpse of the rag dolls, falling over each other in their
mad haste to escape, was so comical that both Lloyd and Betty were
choking with laughter when the matron entered. They could hardly control
their voices while they tried to tell her how the matches had gone out
and Lloyd had imagined that there were witches in the room.

Smiling indulgently at their foolishness, which she attributed to the
excitement of the occasion, the matron withdrew. She could hear them
still laughing when she passed through the hall again, several minutes
later, for the rag dolls, coming out of the closet as soon as she
disappeared, began taking one ridiculous pose after another, in the
middle of the floor. The solemn silence in which they struck their limp,
boneless attitudes, made the scene all the funnier, and as the girls
looked at the surprised expressions Allison had painted on the flat
muslin faces, they went into such hysterical laughter that the tears
streamed down their faces.

"Oh, girls, _do_ stop!" begged Lloyd, finally, wiping her eyes. "I've
laughed till I ache, and it's time for me to dress, for I promised
Magnolia to help her into her costume."

Katie and Kitty subsided into a heap on the divan. "Could you have told
who we were if you hadn't known we were coming?" asked Katie.

"Never in the world," answered Betty. "I couldn't tell which is which
now, if it were not for your voices."

"We're not going to say a word to any one," said Katie. "We oughtn't to
talk, you know, if we carry out our part as it should be. We'll slip up
into the gymnasium pretty soon, and be sitting on the floor in a corner
when the others come up. We'll lop around and watch the fun till the
unmasking begins, then we'll come down here and wait for the rest of
you."

All the time they had been performing, Allison had been busy before the
mirror, and now turned around in her spectral attire.

"The ghost of the veiled lady!" cried Lloyd. "Oh, Allison, yoah make-up
is splendid. You're enough to freeze the blood in one's veins. There
couldn't be anything moah spooky-looking than that thin tulle veil. I
wish Mom Beck could see you. I've heard her talking about that queah
little woman whose house used to stand where the seminary cellah is dug
now, till I couldn't close my eyes at night. All the darkies believe she
still haunts the place."

Betty had never heard the story, so Allison repeated it while she
dressed, adding, "You two must do all you can to spread the report that
I'm lurking around. You have seen me yourself, you know. If I had my
lump of ice, you'd soon feel the touch of my clammy fingers. I wish
you'd give me a piece of newspaper to wrap it in, Betty. Then it won't
drip."

"I wish we could carry a lump of ice around with us," gasped Kitty. "All
this cotton packed around my head and neck makes me so hot I can
scarcely breathe."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Edith and Mrs. Clelling, putting the finishing touches to the
decorations in the gymnasium, looked around, well pleased. A score of
jack-o'-lanterns grinned sociably from the brackets between the windows.
Two more kept guard on each side of the piano, and at least a dozen
lighted the long table stretched across one end of the room, on which
the spread was arranged. Graceful sprays of bittersweet-vine trailed
their bright berries over the white cloth. A huge pumpkin-bowl piled
with grapes formed the centrepiece. A pitcher of sweet cider stood at
each end, and nuts, persimmons, pop-corn balls, gingerbread, and apples
filled all the space between.

"It is well worth the trouble," said Miss Edith, lighting the last
candle. "The girls will enjoy it thoroughly."

Some one called both teachers from the room just then, and in their
absence two uninvited guests, who had been waiting behind the door,
hurried in and seated themselves on the floor in the dimmest corner.

"I should say it _is_ worth the trouble," whispered one rag doll to the
other, as they looked around the room at the fantastic decorations.
"It's lots more fun coming here this way, than having the party at home,
and it's more fun than if we'd been invited."

"I'm nearly roasted," panted the other one, "but I'm glad I'm here. Oh,
how pretty!"

It was the entrance of one of the older girls in court train and
powdered hair that caused the exclamation, and while they were trying to
guess who it could be, the others began to arrive. Old King Cole and
Pocahontas came in arm in arm, followed by Red Riding Hood and a
brownie, while Puss in Boots proudly escorted Aladdin with his lamp.

Little Bo-Peep and Boy Blue were soon recognized, for Betty had made no
attempt to hide the brown curls which helped to make her such a pretty
little Dresden shepherdess; and while Lloyd had gathered up her long,
light hair under the wide-brimmed hat with its blue ribbon, every
graceful gesture and every step she took, holding herself erect with a
proud lifting of the head, proclaimed the Little Colonel.

For once in her short life, little Magnolia Budine tasted the sweets of
social success, for no one there was more popular or more admired than
the saucy Knave of Hearts. With the putting on of the costume she had
put on a courage and self-possession that never could have been assumed
with the old-fashioned tight-waisted blue merino and the stiff short
tails of hair. Grasping the stolen tart firmly in her chubby hands, and
lifting the little slippers with their huge bows and buckles in the
high, mincing step Miss Katherine had taught her, she swaggered
coquettishly up and down the room, her red mantle sweeping behind her.
Wherever she went a flock of admiring girls crowded around her.

For many a month afterward her red and white crown hung over her mirror,
not only as a souvenir of the jolly revel, but as a token that for one
night, at least, she had found favour in the eyes of the Princess. Not
only had Lloyd circled around her when she was dressed, exclaiming again
that she looked perfectly lovely, but when they chose partners for the
ghost-walk, to march solemnly through the halls to the slow music of the
Dead March, the Princess had chosen her. Lloyd had looked around for
Ida, who had come as a Puritan Maid; but the cap and kerchief were
nowhere to be seen. She had evidently grown tired of the affair and gone
to her room.

[Illustration: "'THIS LITTLE KNAVE MUST BE MY PARTNER.'"]

Magnolia did not know that she was second choice. Her cup of happiness
was overflowing when Boy Blue turned away from Aladdin and Red Riding
Hood, who were both trying to claim her, and said, "No, this little
Knave must be my partner. He has stolen my heart as well as the queen's
tarts."

In their corner near the piano Kitty and Katie sat stiffly against the
wall, seemingly incapable of moving themselves. Several times some of
the larger girls made an attempt to lift them, and in whatever position
they fell when they were dropped, they lay with hands thrust out and
heads lolling to one side. There was a laughing crowd around them
continually.

"Oh, my country!" gasped Katie, as the first solemn chords of the Dead
March struck her ear and all light in the room was suddenly extinguished
except what gleamed from the eyes and mouths of the jack-o'-lanterns.
"They've gone and dragged in old Sally, the skeleton. It's bad enough to
hear her bones rattle in the physiology class in the daytime; but this
is more than I bargained for."

"Now is the time for us to go," whispered Kitty. "They'll unmask soon.
We've seen how they all look and set them to guessing, and we'd better
miss the refreshments than run the risk of being discovered."

Katie eyed the table wishfully. "It seems a pity to miss all that
spread. Couldn't we creep around the wall to the far side and slip
something into our apron pockets? The cloth is so long it would hide
us."

"What's to hinder our getting under the table and staying through the
whole performance?" suggested Kitty. "The cloth comes nearly to the
floor, and I don't believe anybody would think of looking under it. Then
we could hear them wonder who we are and where we've disappeared to when
they unmask and we are missing."

"Quick, then, while their backs are turned!" exclaimed Katie, not
waiting to consider consequences or means of escape later in the
evening. Slowly, solemnly, with measured tread, the long procession
filed by, and, wheeling to the music, started back toward the other end
of the long gymnasium.

Creeping on hands and knees, fearful lest some backward glance might
discover them should they stand erect, the two girls, like wary mice,
scuttled across the room and disappeared under the sheltering
table-cloth.

Grown bold with their successful venture, Kitty proposed that each time
the procession turned away from them, they should reach out and grab
something from the table. It was an exciting performance. Time after
time, as the motley figures turned their backs, two ludicrous heads
popped up above the table, and four white woollen gloves clawed hastily
at different dishes. When the marauders dropped from sight the last
time, there was a goodly store of provisions gathered up in each gingham
apron.

"I wouldn't have missed this for anything," giggled Katie some time
later, when the unmasking began, and the girls crowded around the table
for nuts and apples with which to try their fortunes. In such a babel of
voices there was no danger of being overheard.

"Listen! we can tell from the different remarks who every one
represented," they whispered to each other.

"Oh, Evelyn Ward, I knew all the time that you were the court lady. I
recognized your rings."

"That's what fooled me about Aladdin. Susie Figgs had changed rings with
Ada."

"Well, I guessed nearly everybody the first half-hour, except those
ridiculous rag dolls. Does anybody know where they have gone?"

That started the discussion the two under the table had been waiting
for, and the various guesses, falling wide of the mark, were so amusing
that their mirth nearly betrayed their hiding-place. Once they thought
their discovery was certain. They had been feeding themselves from the
store of provisions in their aprons as well as the size of their muslin
mouths would allow. The mouths had been only small slits at first, but
they had stretched and torn them with their fingers until they were
large enough to allow them to take a good-sized bite of apple. As they
sat there, munching nuts and pop-corn, Kitty whispered, "We're like the
man in the verse:

    "'There was a young man so benighted,
     He never knew when he was slighted.
       He went to a party,
       And ate just as hearty
     As if he'd been really invited.'"

Katie tried hard not to laugh, but the effort ended in a snort, and she
almost choked on a grain of pop-corn. If some one had not upset a
jack-o'-lantern just then and started a wild scramble to put out the
candle before it burned the cloth, the unbidden guests must certainly
have been discovered.

Gradually the crowd around the table dwindled away, as little groups
gathered in different parts of the room, intent on various ways of
fortune-telling. Having eaten all they could, and not being able to hear
anything more of interest, the girls under the table began to grow tired
of their position. Moreover, the heat of their costumes seemed to grow
more unbearable every minute.

"We're in a trap," groaned Katie. "How we are ever going to make our
escape is--"

Kitty never heard the rest of the sentence, for half a dozen girls, who
had ventured down the cellar steps with candle and looking-glass, came
bursting into the room almost hysterical with fright. Breathless from
their headlong race up three flights of stairs, they gasped out their
news in broken sentences, each voice in a different key.

"Oh, a real ghost! None of your sheet and pillow-case affairs!"

"White hair and a face like marble and a long floating veil!"

"And it clutched Mary Phillips with fingers that were like the dead!
Didn't it, Mary?"

"No, it didn't come out of the cellar. It just _appeared_!"

"The most awful wail as it vanished!"

"The cook saw it earlier in the evening, floating away toward the
graveyard, not walking, you know, but _floating_! About a foot above the
ground!"

"Allison has evidently had as much fun as anybody," whispered Kitty.
"Oh, will you listen! There goes Lloyd vowing it's the spirit of the
veiled lady, and that she saw it twice this evening."

"And Betty, too! That will convince them if anything could. Betty is
always so serious in the way she tells things."

"Now is the time to go, while they're all so excited and in the other
end of the room," whispered Kitty. "Let's make a wild dash for the door
nearest us, bang it behind us, and blow out the hall light. Then we can
slide down the banister, put out the light in the lower hall, and be
safe in the west wing before they come to their senses. Now, ready!"

It was a daring move, but it proved successful. Every one heard a
scramble, and turned in time to see two crouching figures dash into the
hall. They were too startled to know whether they were human or not.
Somebody screamed when the door banged violently, and Mary Phillips,
who had been in a tremble ever since her flight from the cellar, was
nearly paralyzed with fright. She clutched her nearest neighbour,
wailing, "Oh, what is it?"

By the time matches were brought and the lamps were relit, Katie and
Kitty were safely locked in Lloyd's room, tearing off their disguises
and wiping the perspiration from their flushed faces. For a few minutes
they waited, half-expecting that a search would be made, but as time
went on and no one ventured into that part of the house, they began to
try the Hallowe'en charms that they could not take part in up-stairs.
When Allison came in half an hour later, she found them whirling apple
parings around their heads and flinging them over their shoulders, to
see what initials they would form in falling.

By the time Allison had washed the powder from her face and picked the
cotton from her hair, Lloyd and Betty came in. It seemed as if they
could never settle down enough to think of sleep. There was so much to
talk over. Allison curled up on the divan, announcing that it was not
worth while to undress, as it would soon be time for them to start home.
Kitty and Katie followed her example, appropriating Lloyd's single bed.
Lloyd and Betty took the other one, and they lay whispering until
midnight.

Just as the clock struck twelve Lloyd got up and lighted a candle. Five
eggs, which she had boiled in the chafing-dish earlier in the evening,
lay on a plate on the table. The yolks had been removed and the space
filled with salt. According to a previous agreement, each girl got up
and took one of the eggs. Standing in the middle of the floor in solemn
silence they ate them stoically, although the salt burned and choked
them. Then without a drop of water afterward, they walked backward to
bed. According to the charm, whatever they dreamed after that
performance would come true, and unless they were to be old maids, some
one would appear in their dreams bearing a cup of water. That one would
be their "fate."

None of the five slept soundly that night. The salt made them thirsty,
the crowded quarters restless. Allison wakened every time a rooster
crowed or a dog barked, because she felt that the responsibility of
getting home before Barbry wakened rested upon her. Once when she was
about to sink into a delicious doze, the shrill whistle of a locomotive
aroused her to the consciousness that the early freight-train was
rumbling past the depot. Opening her eyes she saw that the gray dawn
was beginning to steal over the Valley. With a groan she sat up and
stumbled across the room to arouse the others.

She had to shake Kitty several times, and when she at last staggered to
her feet she yawningly quoted old Aunt Cindy's expression, that she was
"as tired as a thousand of dawgs," and vowed she could never get home
unless she was dragged there. Katie complained of a headache and a
miserable "after the ball" feeling. It was a sorry-looking little trio
which finally stumbled down the back stairs and out into the frosty
dawn. Not a word was spoken on the way home. In silence they slipped up
the stairs at The Beeches; in silence they undressed and crept into bed,
and three hours later, when Barbry came as usual to call them, she
knocked half a dozen times before she succeeded in arousing them.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE PRINCESS OF THE PENDULUM


THERE were literary exercises in the chapel the following Friday
afternoon. It was the day for the reading of the _Seminary Star_, a
monthly paper to which all the grades contributed. As a humourous
account of the Hallowe'en celebrated was to be one of the chief
features, spiced by many personal allusions, its appearance was looked
for eagerly.

Little Magnolia Budine was the only one in the room impatient for the
exercises to close. She sat near a front window looking out at every
sound of approaching wheels, to see if the old carryall had stopped at
the high green gate in front of the seminary. She had been hoping all
afternoon that her father would come for her earlier than usual, and she
half-expected that he would. The chill November days were short, and she
knew that he would want to reach home before dark.

It was not that she failed to appreciate the interesting articles in the
_Star_, but she was in a hurry for the ten-mile drive to be over. The
reason for her impatience was packed away in the old carpet-bag, waiting
outside in the hall. Unless she reached home before dark, a certain
pleasure she had in store would have to be delayed till morning. So
intent was she on listening for the sound of wheels, that she failed to
hear the title of a short poem, which one of the editors announced as
written by E. L. L. When Elise nudged her, whispering, "That's about
you, Maggie," she turned with a start and blush to find every one
looking at her. She was so confused she heard only the last verse:

    "Not only did he steal the tarts
       Made by the gracious queen,
     He captured all the schoolgirls' hearts--
       That little knave--on Hallowe'en."

The applause which followed was loud and long. Her heart gave a proud,
glad throb at this public compliment, but her face felt as if it were on
fire, and she longed to drop under her desk out of sight. It was just at
this moment that Mrs. Clelling told her in a low tone that her father
had come and she might be excused. How she ever got to the door with all
those eyes fastened on her was more than she could tell. She felt as if
each foot weighed a ton, and that she was an hour travelling the short
space.

Snatching her hat from the cloak-room and pinning a big gray shawl
around her, she caught up the carpet-bag and ran down to the gate. An
occasional snowflake, like a downy white feather, floated through the
air. The wind was raw and damp, and she was glad to climb in behind the
sheltering curtains of the old carryall and lean up against her father's
rough, warm overcoat.

"Well, Puss, how goes it?" he asked, pulling an old bedquilt up over his
knees and tucking it well around her.

"_Fine_, daddy!" she answered, squeezing his arm in both her mittened
hands and snuggling up to him like a contented kitten. "I think now it's
the nicest school in the world, and I like it better and better every
day."

"Got a good report this week?"

"Yes, I haven't missed a single word in spelling. Mrs. Clelling had to
show me nearly two hours about borrowing in subtraction, but I don't
have any more trouble with it now, and I had a longer list of adjectives
on my language-paper than anybody else in the class."

There was a look of pride in the old farmer's weather-beaten face. He
had had little education himself. He had barely learned to read and
write in the few short terms he had been able to attend school when he
was a boy. He couldn't have told an adjective from any other part of
speech, and his wonder at her amount of learning was all the greater on
that account. He patted her hand affectionately. "That's right! That's
right!" he exclaimed. "The family's dependin' on you, Puss, to do us all
credit." Then he began repeating what she had heard a hundred times
before. He never failed to tell her the same story as they jogged
homeward every Friday night and back again the following Monday morning.
She had heard it so often that it sounded in her ears like the familiar
refrain of an old song to which she need pay no heed. She only waited
patiently until he had finished.

"The older children didn't have no chance when they was young like you.
We were too far away from the public schools to send 'm except just a
spell spring and fall, and we couldn't afford the pay schools, but after
we moved up here and Marthy got married and Tom and Hilliard was big
enough to do for 'emselves and getting good wages, times was easier. Ma
says to me, 'We'll give the baby a fair start in the world, anyhow,'
and I says, 'She'll have the best diplomy that Lloydsboro Seminary can
give if I have to carry her there and home again on my back every day
till she gets it.'"

There was much more in the same strain to which Magnolia listened,
waiting for her turn to speak, as one would wait for an alarm clock to
run down when it was striking. The moment he paused she began, eagerly,
"I've got something right now that mammy will be proud to see."

Diving under the quilt for the carpet-bag, she opened it and took out a
book which lay on top of her clothes.

"Now put on your spectacles, daddy," she ordered, gaily, "or maybe you
won't be able to tell who it is." She slipped a photograph from the book
and held it up before him. Holding the reins between his knees, he
pulled off one glove, felt in various pockets, and finally fished up a
pair of steel-bowed spectacles, which he slowly adjusted.

"Miss Katherine Marks took it," she explained, "and she painted it
afterward, so you can tell exactly how I looked at the masquerade-party."

"If it ain't my little magnolia blossom!" exclaimed the old man,
proudly, holding the beautifully tinted photograph off at arm's length
for a better view. "Wherever did you get all those fine gew-gaws? Why,
Puss, you're prettier than a posy. Sort of fanciful and trimmed up, but
that's your little face natural as life. I should say your mammy will be
proud!"

It took all the time while they were driving the next six miles for
Magnolia to tell of that memorable afternoon and night. How Lloyd
Sherman had taken her over to Clovercroft, and all the Marks family had
helped to make her costume. How beautiful it was, and how the girls had
praised it, and even published a poem about her in the _Seminary Star_;
and next day Miss Katherine had taken her picture, and the day after
that had sent for her to come over to her studio, and had given her a
copy of it to take home.

"Seems to me as if we ought to do something nice for those people who
have been so kind to you," said her father, musingly, when she had told
him the whole story. "You say if it hadn't been for Miss Katherine you'd
have had to miss the party. If you'd have missed that you wouldn't have
had that poetry about you in the paper. I'm proud of that, Puss. Seems
as if my little girl is mighty popular--a sort of celebrity, to get
into the paper. I'd like to show that young lady that I appreciate what
she's done to make you happy. I wonder how she'd like a crock of your
mammy's apple butter. There ain't no better apple butter in all Oldham
County, and I should think she'd be glad to get it. I'll speak about it
when we get home, and if your mammy's willing, I'll carry a crock of it
to the young lady when I take you back to school Monday morning."

Magnolia was not sure of the propriety of such a gift, and he turned the
matter over in his slow mind all the rest of the way home. They jogged
along in silence, for she also was busy with her thoughts. She was
thinking of another picture in the library book which she had not showed
her father. It was an unmounted photograph of Lloyd Sherman which Miss
Katherine had taken the year before.

She had photographed all the children who took part in the play of the
"Rescue of the Princess Winsome," and they were arranged on a panel on
her studio wall. There were several of Lloyd; one at the spinning-wheel,
one with her arms around Hero's neck, and one with the knight kneeling
to take her hand from the old king's. But the most beautiful one of all
was the one of the Dove Song. That picture hung by itself. It was just
a little medallion, showing the head of the Princess with the white dove
nestled against her shoulder. The fair hair with its coronet of pearls
made a halo around the sweet little face, and Magnolia stood gazing at
it as if it had been the picture of an angel. She had no eyes for
anything else in the studio, and Miss Flora, seeing her gaze of rapt
admiration, looked across at her sister and smiled significantly.

"Haven't you a copy of that you could give her, Katherine?" she asked,
in a low tone. "I never saw a child's face express such wistful longing.
It makes me think of some of the little waifs I have seen at Christmas
time, gazing hungrily into the shop windows at the toys and bon-bons
they know can never be for them."

Miss Katherine opened a table drawer, and, after searching a few minutes
among the unmounted photographs it contained, took out one, regarding it
critically.

"This was a trifle too light to suit me," she said, "but too good to
destroy." She crossed the room and held it out to Magnolia, who still
stood gazing at its duplicate on the wall.

Such a look of rapture came into the child's face when it was finally
made clear to her that she was to have the picture to keep that no one
noticed the omission of spoken thanks. She was too embarrassed to say
anything, but she took it as if it were something sacred.

"I suppose because Lloyd happens to be the goddess just now to whom she
burns incense," said Miss Katherine when she had gone. "These little
schoolgirl affairs are very amusing sometimes. They're so intense while
they last."

Maggie could not have told why she did not show the picture of the
Princess to her father. In an undefined sort of way she felt that he
would look at it as he would look at the picture of any little girl, and
that he would not understand that she was so much finer and better and
more beautiful and different in every way from all the other girls in
the world. But Corono would understand. For two days Magnolia had looked
forward to the pleasure of showing it to her.

"Can't you get old Dixie out of a walk, daddy?" she exclaimed at last.
"I'm mighty anxious to get home before sundown. I want to stop at
Roney's with this library book, and show her the picture, too."

Aroused from his reverie the old farmer clucked to his horse, and they
went bumping down the stony pike at a gait which satisfied even Maggie's
impatient desire for speed.

"I reckon Roney will be mighty glad to see you," he remarked, as he
stopped the horse in front of an old cabin a short distance from his own
home. "She's been worse this week. You'll have half an hour yet before
sundown," he added, as he turned the wheel for her to climb out of the
carryall.

"I'll stay till supper-time," she called back over her shoulder, "for I
have so much to tell her this week."

With the library book tucked away under the old gray shawl, she ran down
the straggling path to the little whitewashed cabin.

Roney would understand. Roney had always understood things from the time
they had first been neighbours on a lonely farm near Loretta. That was
when Magnolia was a baby, and Corono, six years older, without a
playmate and without a toy, had daily borrowed her and played with her
as if she had been a great doll. It was Corono who had discovered her
first tooth, and who had coaxed her to take her first step, and had
taught her nearly everything she knew, from threading a needle and tying
a knot, to spelling out the words on the tombstones in the nuns'
graveyard. Corono could often tell what she was thinking about, even
before she said a word. She was the only one at home to whom Magnolia
ever mentioned the Princess.

Several years before the two families had moved away together from the
old place. In that time Corono's mother had died, and her father had
become so crippled with rheumatism that he could no longer manage to do
the heavy work on the farm he had rented. They were glad to accept their
old neighbour's offer of an empty cabin on his place. After that, when
Corono was not at the farmhouse helping Mrs. Budine with her cleaning or
sewing or pickle-making, Magnolia was at the cabin, following at the
little housekeeper's very heels, as she went about her daily tasks. But
now for several months Corono had been barely able to drag from one room
to another. Whether it was a fall she had had in the early summer which
injured her back, or whether it was some disease of the spine past his
skill to discover, the doctor from the crossroads could not decide.

Her father had to be housekeeper now, and they would have had meagre
fare oftentimes, had not a generous share of every pie and pudding baked
in the Budine kitchen found its way to their table.

The weeks would have been almost unbearably monotonous to Corono after
Magnolia started to school had she not looked forward to the Fridays,
when her return meant the bringing of a new library book, and another
delightfully interesting chapter of her life at the seminary.

These glimpses into a world so different from her own gave her something
to think about all week, as she dragged wearily about, trying to help
her father in his awkward struggles with the cooking and cleaning. She
thought about them at night, too, when the pain in her back kept her
awake. Betty and Lloyd and Allison, Kitty and Elise and Katie Mallard,
were as real to her as they were to Maggie. They would have stared in
astonishment could they have known that every week a sixteen-year-old
girl, whom they had never seen, and of whom they had barely heard, was
waiting to ask a dozen eager questions about them.

Maggie ran in without knocking, bringing such a breath of fresh air and
fresh interest with her that Corono's face brightened instantly. She was
lying on the bed with a shawl thrown over her.

"I've been listening for you for more than an hour," said Corono,
propping herself up on her elbow. "I thought the time never would pass.
I counted the ticking of the clock, and then I tried to see how much of
Betty's play I could repeat. I've read it so many times this week that I
know it nearly all by heart."

She picked up the book which lay beside her on the bed. It was the
library copy of "The Rescue of the Princess Winsome," which Maggie had
brought to her the previous Friday. It had been in such constant demand
since the opening of school that she had been unable to obtain it
earlier.

Maggie, about to plunge into an account of her Hallowe'en experiences,
checked herself as Corono winced with pain and her face grew suddenly
white. "What's the matter?" she asked, sympathetically. "Do you feel
very bad?"

To her astonishment Corono buried her face in her pillow to hide the
tears that were trickling down her cheeks, and began to sob.

"I'll run get mammy," said the frightened child, who had never seen
Corono give way to her feelings in such fashion before.

"No, don't!" she sobbed. "I'll be all right--in a minute. I'm just
nervous--from the pain--I haven't slept much--lately!"

Maggie sat motionless, afraid to make any attempt at consolation, even
so much as patting her cheek with her plump little hand. Roney was the
one who had always comforted _her_. She did not know what to do, now
that their positions were suddenly reversed. She was relieved when Roney
presently wiped her eyes and said, with an attempt at cheerfulness,
"There! You never saw me make a baby of myself before! Did you! But I
couldn't help it. Sometimes when it gets this way I wish I could die.
But I've just _got_ to keep on living for daddy's sake. I don't suppose
any one ever told you, and you couldn't understand unless you knew.

"It's this way. My mother's family never wanted her to marry daddy, and
they disowned her when she did, because he wasn't educated and rich and
all that, as they were. They never spoke to her afterward, but when my
grandfather came to die, I reckon he was sorry for the way he'd done,
for he wanted to send for her. It was too late, though. She had died
that spring. Then he tried to make it up in a way, by being good to me,
and he left me an annuity. I can't explain to you just what that is, but
every year as long as I live his lawyer is to pay me some money. It
isn't much, but it is all that daddy and I have had to live on since he
hasn't been able to work. When I die the money will stop coming, so I
feel that I _must_ keep on living even when every breath is agony, as it
is sometimes. I don't think I can stand it much longer. There are days
when I just have to grit my teeth and say I _won't_ give up! I will hang
on for poor daddy's sake. Sometimes I believe that is all that keeps me
alive."

She stopped abruptly, seeing the tears of distress in Maggie's eyes, and
made an attempt to laugh.

"There!" she exclaimed. "Now that I've poured out all my troubles and
eased my mind, I feel better. Tell me about the girls. What have they
been doing this week?"

Much relieved, Maggie produced the photograph of herself, and began an
enthusiastic account of her Hallowe'en experiences. She began with the
visit to Clovercroft, and as she described the handsomely furnished
music-room, with its luxurious rugs and grand piano, and the priceless
pictures that had been brought from over the sea, its lace curtains and
white tiled hearth and andirons that shone like gold, it seemed to her
that the little cabin had never looked so bare. Its chinked walls and
puncheon floor stood out in pitiful contrast. The only picture in the
room was an unframed chromo tacked above the mantel.

As she described the masquerade frolic, she contrasted Roney's lonely
shut-in life with her own and the other girls' at the seminary. A
realization of its meagreness and emptiness stole over her till she
could hardly keep the tears back. A great longing sprang up in her warm
little heart to do something that would compensate as far as possible
for all that she had missed. Acting on that impulse, as she reached the
climax of her story and drew out the cherished photograph of the
Princess, she thrust it into Roney's hand, saying, hurriedly, "Here, you
can have it, Roney. I'd rather you would have it than me."

Corono held the picture eagerly, studying every detail of the beautiful
little medallion. The fair hair with its coronet of pearls, the white
dove nestled against her shoulder, as she had held it when she sang
"Flutter and fly, flutter and fly, bear him my heart of gold,"--all
seemed doubly attractive now with the play fresh in her mind. Besides,
it was the most beautiful picture she had ever seen in all the sixteen
years of her lonely, unsatisfied life.

The intuition that always helped her to understand her little friend
made her understand now in a way that the gift meant a sacrifice, and
she exclaimed, impulsively, "Oh, Maggie! I don't feel as if I ought to
take it from you. You keep it, and just lend it to me once in awhile."

"No, I want you to have it," said Maggie, drawing the old shawl up
around her. "Goodness me! It's getting dark. I'll have to run," and
before Corono could make another protest she rushed away.

As she ran along the path that crossed the pasture between the cabin and
the farmhouse, there was a tremulous smile on her face, but the faint
twilight also showed tears in her eyes. The smile was for the joy she
knew she had given Roney, but the tears were for herself. Nobody knew
how much of a sacrifice she had made in giving up the picture of the
Princess. Even Roney had not guessed how great it was. But she had no
regret next morning when she came back to the cabin. Roney greeted her
eagerly.

"Look!" she cried, pointing to the old wooden clock which stood on the
mantel. "I didn't have a frame to put the picture in, and I was afraid
it would get spoiled without glass over it. While I was looking around
the room wondering what to do, I happened to notice that it was the
same size as the pendulum. Daddy lifted it down for me, and I fastened
the picture on that. So there it is all safe and sound behind the glass
door, and I can see it from any part of the room.

"And, oh, Maggie, you don't know how it helped me last night. It made
the play seem so real to me. As I lay here watching the pendulum, it
stopped saying 'Tick tock, tick tock.' It seemed to me that the Princess
was looking straight at me, saying, instead, '_For love--will find--a
way!_' Then I knew that she meant me. That love would help me bear the
pain for daddy's sake; that my living along as bravely as I could was
like spinning the golden thread, and that I mustn't think about the
great skein that the weeks and months were piling up ahead for me to do;
I must just spin a minute at a time. I can stand the pain when I count
it with the pendulum. Even when the fire died down and I couldn't see
her any longer, I could hear her saying it over and over, 'For
love--will find--a way.' And I lay there in the dark and pretended that
I was a princess, too, spinning love's golden thread, and that my dove
was a little white prayer that I could send fluttering up to God, asking
him to help me find the way to be brave and patient, and to hang on to
life as long as I possibly can for daddy's sake."

Little did the Shadow Club dream that day how far their shadow-selves
were reaching. But Betty's song brought comfort and courage for many an
hour into Roney's lonely life, and the greatest solace in her keenest
suffering was the smiling face of the Princess, swaying back and forth
upon the pendulum.




CHAPTER IX.

ONE RAINY AFTERNOON


THAT same Saturday afternoon following the Hallowe'en frolic, while
Maggie rehearsed the whole affair once more in the cabin, the Shadow
Club discussed it at the seminary. They had met early, for Lloyd and
Betty had asked permission to make candy in their room, and in order to
finish the amount of work they had planned to do at each meeting, it was
necessary for them to begin immediately after dinner.

It was a dull November day, cloudy and damp, and while they were
settling themselves to work, the rain began to patter against the
window-panes.

"How cosy and shut-in it makes you feel!" exclaimed Katie, looking
around on the bright, comfortable room.

"We are shut in," answered Lloyd. "The Clark girls and Magnolia have
gone home to stay ovah Sunday, and we have this whole wing to ourselves.
Nobody can heah us, no mattah how loud we talk."

"Let's put up the sign, 'No admittance. Busy,' on the corridor door
leading into our hall," suggested Ida. "On a rainy afternoon like this,
when the girls can't get out-doors, they're more apt to go visiting, and
we don't want to be interrupted."

"That's so," agreed Lloyd. Hastily scribbling the notice on an envelope,
she ran out and fastened it on the door with a pin.

"Now we're safe," she announced on her return, and settled herself
comfortably among the cushions of the window-seat. For half an hour
their needles and brushes were plied rapidly, as they chattered and
laughed over the various remarks they had heard about the mysterious
Hallowe'en guests. Who they were still remained an unsolved riddle in
the school.

Presently Ida dropped her embroidery-hoops and leaned back in her chair
yawning. "Oh, I'm in no mood for work of this kind! My silks snarl, my
needle keeps coming unthreaded, and I stick myself nearly every time I
take a stitch. I'm making such a mess of it I'd stop only I don't want
to shirk my part when you are all working so faithfully. When my
embroidery acts this way it makes me so nervous I could scream."

"Why don't you do some more burnt-work instead?" suggested Katie.

"I'm out of leather. The last lot I sent for hasn't come."

"You might read to us while we work," suggested Betty. "There's a new
_St. Nicholas_ on the table."

"Yes, do," insisted Allison. "Mother said this morning that she thought
it would be a fine plan for us to take up some good book and read it in
turn while we work."

As all the girls agreed, Ida picked up the magazine and began turning
the leaves.

"What will you have?" she asked. "This scientific article doesn't look
very entertaining, and this football story wouldn't interest anybody but
boys. We can't plunge into the middle of this serial without having read
the first chapters, and, judging from the illustrations and the name of
this girl's story, it is anything but wildly exciting."

She glanced hastily over the remaining pages, and then laid the magazine
aside. "I wonder," she said, hesitatingly, "if any of you have ever read
a book I have in my room, called 'The Fortunes of Daisy Dale.' It's the
sweetest thing; I nearly cried my eyes out over part of it. Of course
it's a novel, and some people object to them unless they're by some
great writer like Thackeray or Scott. I know my aunt does. But I don't
see how this could hurt anybody. It's about a dear little English girl
whose guardian kept her almost like a prisoner, so that he could use her
money. She had such a hard time that she ran away and got a place as a
governess when she was only sixteen. She had all sorts of trouble and
misunderstandings, but it ends happily. All the way through she has such
a beautiful influence on young Lord Rokeby and Guy Wolvering, the
squire's son, who is so wild that his father threatens to disinherit
him. It is his love for her that finally reforms him. Her influence over
him is a living illustration of the motto of our club."

"Then let's read it," proposed Allison, eagerly.

"Oh, yes, go get it, Ida," called Lloyd and Kitty in the same breath.

"That is, if you don't mind reading it twice yourself," added Betty.

"No, indeed!" answered Ida, rising. "I could read it a dozen times and
never tire of it."

In a moment she was back from her room, carrying the book in one hand
and dragging a rocking-chair behind her with the other. She drew it up
to one of the windows, and pushing the curtains farther aside, sat down
and began to read, to the pattering accompaniment of the rain-drops on
the pane. She was a good reader, the best in the seminary, and her well
modulated voice would have lent a charm to any story; but the expression
she threw into this made it seem as if she were recounting her own
personal troubles.

She had not read half a chapter before Lloyd understood why it seemed
so. Ida was putting herself in Daisy Dale's place. Instead of the unjust
guardian there was the unreasonable aunt. Instead of the squire's son,
Edwardo; and the stolen meetings and the smuggled letters and the pearl
Daisy wore in secret recalled the confidences of the night in the
orchard, and many that had been whispered to her since.

The Shadow Club forgot where they were presently. They ceased to notice
that the cold rain drove faster and faster against the windows. They
were treading a winding path across a sunny English meadow with Daisy
and her lover. It was June-time where they wandered. The hawthorn hedges
were budding white, and even the crevices of the old stone wall flaunted
its bloom wherever a cluster of "London pride" could find a foothold.

In a little while Katie's crochet-work slipped into her lap unheeded.
With chin in hands and elbows on her knees, she leaned forward,
listening with rapt attention. Betty laid down her embroidery-hoops, and
Kitty and Allison stopped painting. It was a wild, stormy night now, and
they were suffering with Daisy, as with clasped hands and streaming eyes
she turned her back on her old home, driven out to seek her own living
by her guardian's unbearable tyranny.

Lloyd's cheeks burned redder and redder as the story went on, and Daisy
Dale, established as governess at Cameron Hall, again met Guy Wolvering
and listened to his vows of deathless devotion. She wondered how Ida
could read on so calmly when some of those scenes had been her own
experience. She wondered what the girls would say if they knew all that
she knew. Then she wondered how it would feel to be the heroine in such
scenes, and be the idol of some one's whole existence, as Daisy Dale was
of Guy Wolvering's, as Ida was of Edwardo's.

"Oh, don't stop!" begged five eager voices, when Ida finally laid down
the book.

"I must. It's nearly dark, and my throat is tired. Do you realize I have
been reading all afternoon?"

"Oh, it didn't seem more than five minutes!" exclaimed Katie. "I never
was so interested in anything in my life. I am wild to hear the end."

"Girls!" cried Allison, tragically, starting up from her chair. "I wish
you'd look at that clock! We haven't made the candy, and we've scarcely
worked at all this whole afternoon, and now it's time to go home."

"But how can we?" queried Kitty. "It's simply pouring. Look at those
windows. The rain is coming in torrents."

"We'll have to stay all night," laughed Katie. "Wouldn't it be fun if we
could?"

"You can," cried Lloyd, seizing the suggestion eagerly. "I'm sure that
the matron would be willing. There's plenty of extra rooms on Satahday
night; there's two right heah in this wing. All you have to do is to
telephone home and ask yoah mothahs. I'm suah they'll let you, because
it's such dreadful weathah. Come on, let's go and ask now. Then we can
make the candy befoah suppah, and finish the book befoah bedtime."

With the pouring rain as an excuse, it was easy to obtain the matron's
permission for them to stay, and she herself telephoned to Mrs. Walton
and Mrs. Mallard, explaining the situation and assuring them that the
girls would be well taken care of.

Both mothers gave consent so thankfully that the matron turned away from
the telephone feeling that her hospitable insistence had made these
ladies her friends for life; and she bustled away well pleased with
herself, to put fresh sheets on the beds in the empty rooms in the west
wing.

The Clark sisters' room, next to Lloyd and Betty's, had a closet built
opposite theirs into the same partition-wall, in the deep space beside
the chimney. When both doors were closed no sound penetrated from one
room to the other, but if either were left ajar, any one happening to
step into either closet could hear quite distinctly what was said on the
other side.

The matron, opening the closet door on her side of the wall to fold away
some blankets that she had just taken from the beds, heard Lloyd on the
other side hunting for the bottle of alcohol for the chafing-dish. Then
Katie's voice came piping through high and shrill:

"Wasn't it sweet of Mrs. Bond to telephone herself and insist on our
being allowed to stay? If I had been at the telephone mamma would have
said that she would send the carriage and I needn't get wet, and could
come home just as well as not. But she was willing to accept an
invitation from headquarters. I'm going to save Mrs. Bond some of my
fudge. She's just the dearest thing that ever was."

[Illustration: "SHE COULD HEAR EVERY WORD OF THE CONVERSATION."]

"I shall save her some, too," said Kitty. "I'd like to give her a good
big squeeze for being so kind to us."

Mrs. Bond stepped out into the room again with a pleased smile on her
motherly face. As she went down-stairs she began revolving a plan in her
mind for the evening entertainment of these appreciative little guests
which she thought would give them still greater pleasure. Scarcely had
she gone when another listener took her place. This time the
eavesdropping was intentional.

Mittie Dupong, crossing over to the west wing to borrow a magazine from
Betty, saw the sign on the corridor door. Knowing what such signs
usually mean at five o'clock on a Saturday afternoon, she softly turned
the knob and stepped into the narrow hall. A delicious smell of boiling
candy came floating down toward her from Lloyd's room, and a peal of
laughter, in which she distinguished first Allison's voice, then Kitty's
and Katie's. She felt a trifle piqued at being left out of the
merry-making.

"I wonder who else is in there," she thought, slipping on toward the
keyhole. Just as she was about to stoop and peep in, a sudden noise
inside as of some one coming toward her made her draw back. The door
into the Clark girls' room stood open. She darted in and waited
breathlessly. Lloyd was coming out into the hall, saying, "Never mind
about the lamp-chimney; I'll get Cassie's."

Mittie had barely time to spring into the closet when Lloyd entered,
took the lamp from the table, and carried it back to her own room.
Crouched down in her dark hiding-place Mittie discovered that the closet
was a far better situation for eavesdropping than the keyhole. She could
hear every word of the conversation without the risk of being detected.

Evidently the girls were discussing some story that they had been
reading, and a very sentimental one at that. A wicked little gleam of
triumph came into Mittie's eyes as she listened. For here were Lloyd and
Allison and Kitty and Katie Mallard and Betty, actually teasing each
other about the boys they liked best. And it hadn't been a week since
Lloyd had said, with a scornful little toss of her head, "Oh, Mittie,
you make me ti'ahed! Always talking about the boys!" and the four of
them had walked off with their arms around each other as if quite
disgusted.

"Oh, won't I get even with them now for turning up their noses at me!"
exclaimed Mittie to herself, and she pressed her ear closer to the thin
partition wall that divided the two closets.

Katie's voice came first: "If I'd been Daisy Dale I'd have fallen in
love with Lord Rokeby instead of the Squire's son, because he was tall
and fair and blue-eyed."

"Like Charlie Downs," put in Kitty, mischievously. "Oh, girls! Look at
her blush!"

"I'm not blushing," protested Katie, wildly.

"But you can't deny that he's the one," insisted Kitty. "Even when we
were little and used to play 'lady come to see' you always played that
you were Mrs. Downs, you know you did."

"I don't care," pouted Katie. "I don't do it now, and anyhow I don't
keep an old dead rose and a valentine and a brass button all tied up in
a fancy box with blue ribbon, the way you do, because Guy Ferris gave
them to you. N-ow, who's blushing?"

"Katie Mallard, that's something you promised you'd never tell as long
as you live!" cried Kitty. "I didn't think you'd be so mean as to go
back on your promise." She turned away with such an offended air that
Katie saw that her teasing had gone farther than she intended. She
hastened to make amends, for she couldn't be happy while there was the
slightest misunderstanding between her and her best friend.

"I didn't think you'd care, Kitty. Truly I didn't. I wouldn't have
teased you before the other girls, but just here, in our own little
club, it oughtn't to make any difference. Why, I don't mind one bit
telling you girls that I like Charlie Downs better than any boy I know,
and that I felt glad when my apple parings made his initials every time
I threw them over my shoulder on Hallowe'en. I don't think it's anything
to confess that much, or to care for things a boy gives you as you do
for the valentine and the rose. That's a very different matter from
talking about the boys as Mittie Dupong does about Carter Brown."

"Well I should think so!" exclaimed Lloyd, in a tone that made Mittie,
on the other side of the wall, set her teeth together angrily. "But
Mittie isn't like the girls we've always gone with. She's so _common_!
She plays _kissing-games_. I've nevah had any use for her since Cartah
Brown's birthday pahty. When they played Pillow and Post-office, every
boy in the room kissed her, and Lollie Briggs and all that set of girls
that she goes with. I couldn't undahstand it. Some of them seemed so
nice; Flynn Willis, you know, and Caddie Bailey. I wouldn't have thought
it of them."

"I think they are all nice girls," said Betty, "even Mittie. It's just
because they have been brought up that way. They've all come from little
towns where such games are the custom, and they really don't know any
better. Don't be so fierce about it, Lloyd. One of the girls at our
table ate with her knife when she first came, and took her soup out of
the end of her spoon, and picked her pie up in her fingers. But she's as
ladylike in her manners as anybody now. She simply hadn't been taught
how to eat. Those girls will change, too, probably in time."

"But this is different," persisted Lloyd. "I know whom you mean. It was
that little Prosser girl. But for all her bad table mannahs she was a
lady at heart. _She_ didn't take part in those games, and she wouldn't
allow a boy to take such a liberty with her as to kiss her, any moah
than one of us girls would, that had been brought up heah in the Valley.
I'll always be glad we didn't ask Mittie or any of that set to join our
club. They may be all right, but if they don't want to be considahed
common they oughtn't to do things that make them seem so, and that are
considahed so by the best society."

The blue blood of an old patrician family, proud of its traditions and
proud of its generations of gentle breeding was coursing hotly through
the Little Colonel's veins as she spoke. Mittie could imagine how she
looked as she stood there passing judgment, her head haughtily lifted, a
flush on the high-bred little face. The mortified eavesdropper could not
feel that she had really done anything wrong at the party, for as Betty
had said, such games were always played in the country place where she
came from, even in the presence of grown people. And the sport was often
rough and boisterous, as it is among the peasant class of the older
countries. But measuring herself by Lloyd's exacting standard, she
somehow felt that she had been found sadly wanting, and she angrily
resented the verdict of this little patrician, who, dainty and refined
to the very finger-tips, made her seem less of a lady, less worthy of
respect than herself.

The next instant Lloyd's scornful tone changed to one of cheerful
sweetness, as she called, "Bring the buttered plates, Betty, please. The
fudge is ready to pour out."

Hiding there in the dark closet, Mittie heard many things during the
next half-hour, which she stored away in her memory for future
repetition. The secret of the Shadow Club was one, for they discussed it
freely, regretting that they had accomplished so little that afternoon,
and discussing the place of the next meeting.

With the curtains drawn, and the red lamp-shade casting a soft rosy glow
over the room, it seemed a time for confidences. The rain came harder
and harder in stormy gusts against the windows, but the curtains that
shut out the night seemed to shut them in with the warmth and cheer of
the cosy room. As they drew their chairs around the table, rocking
comfortably back and forth, with the candy passing from hand to hand,
they felt more closely drawn together themselves than they ever had
before. And they talked of things they had never mentioned to each other
before. "The Fortunes of Daisy Dale" had turned their thoughts toward
the far-off future, and standing before its closed gate as if it were
the portal to some unexplored Paradise, they questioned each other with
eager wondering, as to what might lie in store for them on the other
side.

"Well," exclaimed Katie, at length, "when I grow up, I hope the man who
proposes to me will do it just as Guy did. I think it's so pretty, that
scene in the cherry lane." She quoted, softly: "'The cherry lane is all
in bridal white, my Marguerite, and when it blooms again I'll come to
claim my bride--my pearl.'"

"I wonder if they all talk that way," mused Kitty.

"Of course not," said Betty, with a laugh. "It wouldn't fit in most
cases. Imagine old Mr. Andrews calling his little black skinny wife his
Jane Maria, his pearl! I suppose most people do it in as commonplace a
way as Laurie proposed to Amy, in 'Little Women.'"

"I'm going to ask papa what _he_ said," declared Katie.

Then the supper-bell rang, and Mittie heard no more. As soon as it was
safe to venture from her hiding-place, she followed them down to the
dining-room.

Anxious to get back to the reading of the book, the members of the
Shadow Club could hardly conceal their disappointment when Mrs. Bond
invited them into her parlour after supper, to try some new games which
she thought would interest them. Under the circumstances they felt it
would be impolite to refuse. They whispered to each other that they
would slip away early, but one thing after another kept them, and it
was bedtime before they started up-stairs.

"Oh, I'm so dreadfully disappointed!" wailed Katie; "I won't be able to
sleep a wink to-night for wondering how that story is going to end."

"We'll never have such a good chance to finish it again," said Allison,
"and even if Ida should loan us the book, we'll not enjoy it as much as
if she could read it to us. Her reading adds so much to it."

Kitty expressed the same opinion, and openly envied Lloyd and Betty,
who, being in the same building, might have future opportunities which
would be denied them. At last Ida proposed that they finish the book
after the curfew signal, and preparations were hastily made.

As soon as Kitty and Katie were ready for bed, they took possession, as
before, of Lloyd's bed. Lloyd and Betty climbed into the one on the
other side of the room. Allison carried blankets and pillows from the
next room to the divan, where she made herself comfortable, and Ida,
putting a heavy woollen bathrobe over her night-dress, and stretching
out in a steamer-chair with a shawl over her, began to read. There was a
golf cape draped over the transom. Paper was stuffed in the keyholes,
the outside shutters were tightly closed, the blinds drawn, and the
curtains pinned together over them, so that not a single telltale ray of
light could betray them to the outside world. Three lamps stood in a row
on the table, so that they might be burned in turn, and no one of them
be found with the oil entirely consumed in the morning.

Everywhere in the big building was silence and sleep, save in that one
room in the west wing. There Ida's voice went musically on, and, with
eyes wide open and every sense alert, the girls lay and listened. The
rain still poured on, and the wind rattled the casements. Down-stairs
the clock struck ten, eleven, twelve; but not till the bride-bells rang
out in the last chapter from the steeple of the little stone church in
the English village did they lose interest for a moment in the "Fortunes
of Daisy Dale." The beautiful ending was something for them to dream
over for weeks. It was Sunday morning before Ida and the three guests
stole to their rooms, and crept shivering between the cold sheets.




CHAPTER X.

A PLOT


"IF there's anything I _loathe_ it's a sneak and a telltale!" The Little
Colonel's voice rang out so clearly that the girls in the cloak-room
stopped to listen.

It was Monday morning, and the pupils were assembling in the chapel for
opening exercises. Lloyd stood near the door, the centre of an indignant
little group, which cast scornful glances at another little group,
whispering together by one of the windows.

"It's the most contemptible thing that evah happened in the seminary,"
Lloyd continued. "It's a disgrace to have such a girl in school."

Katie, who had been anxiously watching the cloak-room door for the last
five minutes, for the appearance of Allison and Kitty, suddenly
exclaimed, "There they are now, hanging up their wraps. Let's hurry and
tell them before school begins!"

The next instant the two late comers found themselves in a corner,
hemmed in by Betty, Katie, and Lloyd, all so indignant that they could
scarcely make themselves understood.

"Girls," began Lloyd, in a voice quavering with anger, "you nevah heard
anything so outrageous! Satahday aftahnoon, all that time we were making
fudge up in our room, somebody was hiding in the closet next to ours,
listening to every word we said!"

"How do you know?" gasped Kitty, remembering with dismay several
speeches she had made, which would sound decidedly foolish if repeated.

"Lollie Briggs said so. We'd hardly got into the room this mawning when
some of the girls began to laugh and repeat every word we had said."

"It's all over the school about our Shadow Club," chimed in Betty, "and
think how hard we tried to keep it secret! And the very girls who would
have been glad to join, if they had been invited in the first place, are
making fun of it. They keep pointing to the ground behind us, and
pretend to be amazed at what they see there. Of course they are
referring to our shadows, for they make all sorts of spiteful little
side remarks about them."

"But there's something worse than that," added Katie, almost tearfully.
"I'll never hear the last of the speech I made about Charlie Downs and
the apple-paring initials. Oh, you just wait! They've got hold of every
foolish little thing we teased each other about that afternoon; Guy
Ferris' valentine and brass button, and the little silver arrow Malcolm
Maclntyre gave Lloyd years ago, and all we said about the way we'd like
to be proposed to, you know--when we were talking about the 'Fortunes of
Daisy Dale.' They're telling it all over the school, and making us
appear too ridiculous for any use."

"Who could be mean enough to hide and listen?" exclaimed Allison,
indignantly. "The sneak!"

"Say snake, while you're about it," hissed Kitty. "They're spelled with
the same letters."

"We haven't any idea," answered Betty, "or why the girls who are doing
the most teasing and talking should take such a spiteful pleasure in it.
They've seemed so friendly always, until this morning."

"Come, girls," called Mrs. Clelling, in passing. "It's time for the
silence bell."

Hurrying out of the cloak-room, they took their places in chapel, and
obediently opened their song-books at the signal, but it is doubtful if
any member of the Shadow Club could have told afterward what was sung
that morning. The letter in Ida's chatelaine-bag, which Lloyd had
smuggled to her soon after breakfast, on her return from the
post-office, absorbed all her thoughts. The other five girls were busy
with the one question: "Who could have been such a sneak as to listen
and tell?"

There were six bad records in every recitation that the club made that
morning. Notes flew back and forth, and anxious eyes watched the clock,
eager for recess to come. At the first signal, Lloyd flew to Ida, but
before she could outline the plan of action she and Allison had decided
upon in the history class, Ida said, hurriedly, "Oh, Princess, that
letter has upset me so I don't know whether I'm walking on earth or air.
I'll tell you to-morrow--something awfully important, but I've got to
plan something now, so I must go off by myself and put on my
thinking-cap. Oh, I'm all in a flutter."

Wondering what news the letter could have contained to bring such a
becoming flush to Ida's face, and such a glow of happiness in the
beautiful violet eyes, Lloyd turned away disappointed. But she forgot
both the wonder and the disappointment a few minutes later, as she and
Allison walked up and down in front of the seminary arm in arm. Kitty
and Katie were just behind them. Betty had not yet come out, having
stopped at the sight of Janie Clung's tears to explain a problem in
arithmetic.

Lollie Briggs, Flynn Willis, and Caddie Bailey stood on the front steps,
and each girl who came out of the hall was called into their midst, and
told something with many significant glances toward the four pacing back
and forth past them in a fine unconcern.

Presently Caddie called out in a voice intended for them to hear, "I
wonder if anybody can guess this conundrum. Nell, can you?"

The question was addressed to one of the older girls who came out of the
front door just then, without a wrap around her. It was a frosty
morning, and every one else had either a jacket or cloak.

"Wait till I run back and get my golf cape," she cried. "I didn't know
it was so cold."

"Now look out," whispered Allison to Lloyd. "They're going to say
something to her to try to set her against us. They're stopping
everybody who comes out. That makes eight already they've set to
whispering and looking at us, all standing there in that crowd on the
steps."

Nell came out again, hugging her golf cape around her, and stood on the
top step. "Well, what's your conundrum?" she asked, good-naturedly.

Caddie slightly raised her voice. "What's the difference between a
person who wouldn't stoop to 'anything so common as a kissing-game,' and
a person who would get up a goody-goody club, pretending it was for the
benefit of the poor, and yet all the time be using it simply as an
excuse to meet and read silly novels on the sly, and talk about the
boys, and roast the other girls behind their backs, whom they considered
'too common' to associate with them?"

In a flash Lloyd realized what had offended Caddie, and what was the
cause of her covert sneers. Whoever it was who had played the sneak had
taken pains to report every word she had said about the girls who had
played Pillow at Carter Brown's party. She looked around to see who had
been the most active in denouncing the club. There they were on the
steps, Flynn Willis, Caddie Bailey, Lollie Briggs, all but Mittie
Dupong. The same girls she had called common, because they had allowed
the boys to take a liberty which she thought cheapened them. She knew
now why they were so spiteful in their remarks. Before Nell could gather
her wits together for a reply, Lloyd sprang forward, her eyes flashing.

"Why don't you come straight out and say what you mean, Cad Bailey?"
she cried. "You're only telling part of the truth. Now I'll tell it all.
I did say behind your backs that I thought it was common to play
kissing-games, and now I say it to yoah faces. I can't help thinking it.
I've been brought up that way, and if you've been brought up
differently, then you've a right to think yoah way. If I've hurt yoah
feelings, I beg yoah pahdon, but I have a right to express my opinion in
my own room to my best friends. We were _not_ 'roasting' anybody. We
only made a criticism that you must expect to have made on you, whenevah
you do things that are common. And what are you going to say about the
person who hid and listened all aftahnoon? _Somebody_ was sneak enough
not only to hide in a closet and betray secrets that no girl of honah
would have listened to, but she misrepresented the club in repeating
them."

Lloyd's temper was rapidly getting the best of her, but in the middle of
her anger she seemed to hear her father saying, in the playful way in
which he used to warn her long ago, "Look out, little daughter, the
tiger is getting loose." She stopped short.

"Who did that?" cried Nell. "I didn't suppose there was such a
dishonourable girl in the school."

"Neither did I," answered Flynn Willis, quickly. "I never stopped to ask
how the report started. I was so mad at being talked about that I did
just what Cad Bailey told me to do, repeated everything I was told, just
to tease the club and get even."

All eyes were turned inquiringly to Caddie Bailey.

"I don't know how it started," she cried. "Honestly I don't. Lollie
Briggs told me. She and several girls were talking about it this morning
before breakfast, out in the hall. They were all furious, and they told
me lots of things to say that would tease Lloyd and the rest of them
nearly to death. I was mad, too, but I don't know who told in the first
place."

"It was you, Lollie Briggs, who told me that somebody had hid in the
Clark girls' closet," cried Lloyd. "You know you did, when I demanded to
know who had started all this talk. Who was it?"

"I promised I wouldn't tell," said Lollie, sullenly, "and I won't. You
needn't ask, for no power on earth could drag it out of me. So there!"

"It's like the story of Chicken Little," laughed Nell. "'Who told you,
Goosey-Lucy? Ducky-Lucky. Who told you, Ducky-Lucky? Henny-Penny. Who
told you, Henny-Penny?' Seems to me I'd make it my business to find out
who this particularly contemptible Chicken Little happens to be, before
I'd report any more of her tales."

Nell swept back into the hall, and, as the four girls started to resume
their walk, Betty knocked on the cloak-room window, beckoning violently
for them to come inside. They ran in pell-mell and shut the door behind
them.

"I've found out!" cried Betty, in a tragic whisper. "It was Mittie
Dupong! Cassie found her class-badge on their closet floor, and just now
brought it down to her. She denied it was hers, but there's no mistaking
that queer little stick-pin and chain fastened to it that she uses as a
guard. She's the only one in school who has one like that--an owl's head
in a wishbone, you know. Besides, there were her initials, M. D., on the
under side of the badge. Cassie turned it over and showed them to her.
She took it, then, but denied having been in the closet, and was so
confused and contradicted herself so many times that anybody could see
that she felt caught and was telling a story. She even vowed that she
hadn't been near the west wing for a week. Then she ran out and banged
the door, but Janie Clung said, 'Oh, what a story! I met her coming out
of there Saturday night, on the way down to supper.'"

"What do you think we ought to do about it?" asked Katie. That was a
question no one could answer. In the first flush of their indignation,
it seemed to them that nothing they could do to Mittie would be
sufficient punishment for such an act of meanness. They felt that she
was a disgrace to the school, and decided that they would be conferring
a benefit on the seminary if they could succeed in getting rid of her.

Even Betty failed for the time to remember the "Road of the Loving
Heart" she was trying to leave behind her in every one's memory; and, if
the little talisman on her finger pricked her tender conscience once or
twice, she silenced it with the reflection that it was her duty to help
punish the doer of such a contemptible deed. The name of the club
finally suggested the means.

"She told all the secrets of the Shadow Club, and spoiled it," said
Katie. "Now we just ought to shadow _her_. Haunt her, you know, like the
Ku Klux Klan, or the White Caps, so she'll leave school and be afraid to
listen again as long as she lives."

"Yes," agreed Kitty. "We'll _hoodoo_ her. That is the way."

Such a plan never would have been thought of in a Northern school. Even
in this little Kentucky seminary it is doubtful if it could have been
carried out had not previous events paved the way. There was scarcely a
pupil in the school whose earliest impressions had not been tinged in
some degree by the superstitions of some old coloured nurse or family
servant. Even Lloyd had not escaped them entirely, in spite of all her
mother's watchful care. Mom Beck knew better than to talk of such things
openly before her, but she had hinted of them to the other servants in
her presence, till Lloyd had a vague uneasiness when she dreamed of
muddy water, or spilled the salt, or saw a bird flying against a window.
From babyhood such happenings had been associated in her mind with Mom
Beck's portents of ill-luck.

There was not a coloured person in the neighbourhood who could have
explained why so many graves in the negro cemetery had bottles or
fruit-jars placed upon them, inside of which were carefully sealed the
whitest of chicken feathers. Undoubtedly they were the relic of some old
African fetish, and a reverence for them had been handed down from
grizzled grandsire to little pickaninny since the beginning of the
slave-trade. In the same way had come all those other superstitions at
which white people laughed, but which influenced many of them also to
some extent. For many a man who scoffed most, felt more comfortable when
he saw the new moon in an open sky than when he caught first sight of it
through the trees; and more than one, having once started on a journey,
would not have turned back, no matter what important thing was left
behind, preferring to do without at any cost or inconvenience rather
than risk the ill-luck the turning back would bring.

Lloyd knew more than one housekeeper in the neighbourhood who, for the
same reason, would not allow the ashes emptied after sundown, or an
umbrella to be raised in the house; and who would turn pale if a mirror
was broken or a picture fell from the wall or a dog howled in the night.

Probably not a pupil in the school would have admitted that she believed
in ghosts, yet few would have been brave enough to venture into the
cellar at night after Mary Phillips' encounter with the spirit of the
"veiled lady" on Hallowe'en. That had been a frequent topic of
conversation since that night, and had done much to prepare the way for
the plot the club concocted.

So Kitty's proposition was received with enthusiasm. The performance
began next day when she slipped up behind Mittie in the cloak-room, and
solemnly touched her three times in quick succession on the left ear
with something she held in her hand. It felt soft and furry, and Mittie,
who had a horror of caterpillars, gave a little shriek as she put up her
handkerchief to brush it away.

Kitty had already disappeared into the chapel, but Katie was waiting,
ready to begin her part of the performance.

"Did you see that?" she said to Janie Clung, in an awed tone, just loud
enough for Mittie to hear, and yet low enough to seem confidential.

"I know people who would go stark, raving crazy if that was done to
them. What for? I thought everybody knew what for. My old nurse used to
say that to be touched three times on the ear by the left hind foot of a
rabbit that had been killed in a graveyard in the dark of the moon by a
cross-eyed person, was the worst luck anybody could have." She lowered
her voice a trifle. "_It's a hoodoo-mark! You're marked for the haunts
to follow you!_"

"The what?" asked another girl who stood near.

"The haunts--ghosts--you know. Jim Briddle calls them 'ha'nts.' Nobody
could be more cross-eyed than he is, and he's the one who gave that
rabbit's foot to Ranald Walton, and Ranald gave it to Kitty. I should
think that Mittie Dupong would feel mighty creepy if she knew what's
ahead of her."

Mittie heard and did feel creepy, although she shrugged her shoulders
and tried hard to appear unconcerned. The fact that the club seemed to
place so much reliance in the hoodoo made a strong impression on Janie
Clung, and gave it a weight it would not have possessed otherwise when
the occurrence was repeated to the other girls. Before the week was over
it was whispered around the school that the charm was really working.




CHAPTER XI.

A WOLF IN SHEEP'S CLOTHING


EVERY day since the first of November there had been a letter for Ida in
the Sherman's post-office box, under cover of Lloyd's address. Lloyd had
grown to dread the afternoon walks with the school, for she was in a
flutter of nervousness from the moment they came in sight of the
post-office until the letter was safe in Ida's possession. There was
always the fear that Betty might get to the window first, or that she
might catch sight of the envelope, addressed with many flourishes in a
big, bold hand; or that that letter might be the only one, as it often
was, and Betty might wonder why Lloyd's face should grow so red when she
answered, "No, nothing for us this time."

It was easier to manage after the weather turned cold enough to furnish
an excuse for carrying a muff, but even then she fancied that Miss
Mattie looked at her curiously sometimes, when she thrust the daily
letter hastily out of sight without a second glance. She never went
through the performance without wishing that it might be the last time
that she should be placed in such an uncomfortable position; but
afterward she always reproached herself for making such a wish. It
seemed a very poor friendship that could not stand a little test like
that. It was such a small thing to do when the happiness of her friend's
whole life was at stake.

Then she had her reward in the evenings, when Ida, with her arms around
her, whispered her undying gratitude, or read her extracts from her
letters, which gave her glimpses into a romance far more beautiful than
the "Fortunes of Daisy Dale," or the "Heiress of Dorn," or any of the
others they had read since.

A sort of circulating library had started since the rainy night the
Shadow Club read its first volume. Ida had a pile of paper-covered books
in her closet which she pronounced fully as interesting as the one she
had read aloud; so "Elsie's Wooing," "Fair but False," and the "Heiress
of Dorn" began passing in turn from the covers of Katie's geography to
Kitty's, and from Lloyd's history to Betty's and Allison's. They read at
recess, they read before school, and more than once some exciting
chapter proved too interesting to be laid aside in study time for the
work of the hour.

After a few volumes of such tales, Betty became fired with an ambition
to write one herself, and soon became so absorbed in her pastime that
she could think of little else. Eugene was the name of her hero, and
Gladys was the maiden who combined all the beauty and virtues possible
for one mundane creature to possess. The whole club was consulted as to
the colour of her eyes and hair, and many points about which the little
author was undecided. They came in time to regard Eugene and Gladys as
real personages, in whom they had a family interest. Lloyd had bits of
the story read to her sometimes when they were getting ready for bed.
Betty lost interest in everything to such an extent that she ceased to
be sociable, and spent most of her time alone, dreaming out different
scenes in the story, which filled her mind to the exclusion of even her
lessons.

One afternoon, near the middle of November, Lloyd, hurrying through the
lower hall with an open letter in her hand, met the president.

"Oh, Doctah Wells!" she exclaimed. "I was just going to yoah room. Heah
is a note mothah sent you in the lettah that came to-day. She has
written for some things she needs, and wants Betty and me to walk up to
Locust aftah school with a message to the servants about packing them,
if you'll excuse us from the regulah promenade."

"Certainly," he answered, glancing over Mrs. Sherman's gracefully
written request.

"But Betty has such a bad cold," continued Lloyd, "that the matron
thinks she oughtn't to go out to walk to-day, and it's lonely going back
home by myself, when it's all shut up. May I take Ida Shane with me
instead? She's nevah seen Locust from the inside, and I'd love to show
it to her. You know," a little smile dimpling her face as she spoke, "I
can't help being proud of the old place."

"You have good reason," said the professor, smiling back at her kindly.
"It is certainly a beautiful old homestead. Yes, I have no objection to
Ida's going with you."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Lloyd. She hurried up the stairs to Ida's room,
calling excitedly as she reached the door, "Yes, he says you may go.
Hurry and put on your things so that we can have as long time as
possible up there."

Betty had gone into the matron's room in her absence. It took Lloyd only
a moment to slip into her hat and coat. Then catching up her muff and
thrusting it under her arm, she started back to Ida's room, buttoning
her gloves as she went. Ida had taken down her hair and was deliberately
rearranging it before the mirror.

"Oh, what did you do that for?" cried Lloyd, half-impatiently. "It
looked all right as it was. We're not going to see any one but the
servants. There's no use wearing your best hat." She glanced at the mass
of velvet and plumes lying on the bed. "Just pin your hair up any
fashion and stick on your mortar-board. That'll do."

"Shut the door, please," said Ida, in a low tone. "I have something to
tell you." She bent nearer the mirror, drawing the comb through the
fluffy pompadour. "We _are_ going to see some one this afternoon.
_Edwardo is in the Valley._"

Lloyd dropped her muff at this surprising announcement, but Ida went on,
calmly. "I've been expecting him for several days. He comes to
Lloydsboro sometimes to visit his cousin. I've lain awake nights trying
to arrange some way to see him. This is a thousand times better than any
way I could think of. I'm the luckiest girl that ever lived to have such
a friend as you to plan for me, Princess."

"I don't know what you mean," exclaimed Lloyd. "I haven't planned
anything."

"No, not intentionally, but look how easy you have made it for me to
have an interview. He'll be on the watch for the seminary girls to pass
by the store, for I was to manage to leave a note there for him, telling
him where I can see him. All I have to do now is to signal him to
follow, and we can have a good long talk at Locust while you are giving
the servants their orders. You don't mind, do you?" she asked, as Lloyd
continued to stare at her without saying anything.

"No. Oh, no! Of co'se not," answered Lloyd, with a confused laugh. "Only
it makes me feel so que'ah to think that I'm really going to see him.
It's just as if Lord Rokeby or the squire's son had stepped out of the
book. I feel as if I were in a book myself since you told me that. This
is the way it would be on the page, if we could stand off and read about
ourselves: 'And Violet's little friend led the way down the long avenue,
and there on the threshold of her home, after months of cruel
separation, the reunited lovers kept their tryst.'"

Ida laughed happily. "You'll have a book written before Betty is
half-started if you go on at that rate. Now tell me. Do I look all
right?"

She was settling the big picture-hat in place over her soft hair as she
anxiously asked the question. Lloyd regarded her critically, tipping her
head a trifle to one side as she looked.

"Put your hat a hairbreadth farther over your face," she exclaimed.
"There! That's lovely. Oh, Violet, that shade of velvet is _so_ becoming
to you. It's just the colah of yoah eyes. I nevah saw you look so
beautiful."

A becoming pink flushed Ida's cheeks. She bent her head over the bunch
of violets pinned on the lapel of her coat. "It's dear of you to think
so," she said, "and it's dear of you to send me these violets every
week. These are unusually sweet. I'm so glad I have a fresh bunch for
to-day--this happy day."

Lloyd took the keenest delight in watching the graceful girl sweep down
the hall ahead of her. From the plumes of the picture-hat to the hem of
her stylish gown she thoroughly satisfied Lloyd's artistic instinct for
the beautiful. She gave her arm an adoring little squeeze as they passed
down the stairs together.

Out on the road she glanced up at Ida again. Happiness had not made her
radiant, as it did Daisy Dale, but there was a soft light in the violet
eyes which made Lloyd think of a picture she had seen of a vestal maiden
on her way to guard the holy altar fires.

Lloyd's heart began to beat faster as she realized that every step was
taking them nearer to Edwardo. She pictured him again in her
imagination, as she had done so many times before. She would know that
pale, serious face with its flashing eyes anywhere she might meet him,
she was sure.

Neither of them spoke as they hurried along the path through the lower
part of Clovercroft and pushed open the woodland gate. But as they
stepped up on the platform in front of the depot, Lloyd said, "Let's
cross the track heah, and go up on the othah side of the road. Then
we'll not have to pass the waiting-rooms. There's always so many people
loafing around the window of the telegraph-office."

Instinctively she felt that while a little girl like herself would
attract no attention, Ida in her long sweeping dress that she held up so
gracefully, and the big hat drooping over her pretty face, and the
stylish fur collar, and the violets on her coat, made a picture that any
one would turn to look at twice. She could not bear to think of the bold
glances that might be cast after her by the loafers around the depot. It
seemed to her little short of sacrilege, although she could not have
put the feeling into words, for any eyes but Edwardo's to rest upon her
as she went on her way to this meeting with that vestal-maiden look upon
her face.

"Very well," assented Ida. "You know we want to stop at the store. I
want to get some chocolate creams if they have any fresh ones."

[Illustration: "HE HELD IT ASIDE FOR THEM BOTH TO PASS THROUGH."]

Lloyd's heart gave a frightened thump as she remembered that it was in
the store that Edwardo would be watching presently for the seminary
girls to go by. It was half an hour earlier than they usually passed,
but there was a possibility that he might be there. In less than a
minute she might be face to face with the live hero of a real romance.
It was with an odd feeling of mingled relief and disappointment that she
glanced around the store and saw only familiar faces. A young man whom
she knew by sight was perched on the bookkeeper's high stool at the back
of the store, so absorbed in the Louisville evening paper which the last
mail-train had brought out that he did not look up. A small coloured boy
stood patiently by the stove waiting for his coal-oil can to be filled.
One of the clerks was tying up a package of groceries for Frazer to
carry over to Clovercroft, and the other was showing ginghams to Mrs.
Walton's Barbry.

"Be with you in a moment, please," called the first clerk as the girls
entered. Lloyd stopped in front of the show-case near the door, and
began idly examining the various styles of jewelry and letter-paper
displayed within. She had almost decided to invest in a certain little
enamelled pin which she knew would delight Mom Beck, and take it up to
her as a surprise, when Barbry stepped beside her with a polite greeting
and an inquiry about her grandfather's health.

While she was still talking with Barbry, Ida came up flushed and
excited. She thrust her bag of chocolates into her muff, and, catching
up her skirts, said, hurriedly, "Come on, I'm ready."

Lloyd started at once to follow her to the door, but looked back to nod
assent to Barbry's last remark, and in turning again almost ran into the
young fellow who had been reading at the bookkeeper's desk. He was
hurrying after Ida to open the door for her. He held it aside for them
both to pass through, and a flush of displeasure dyed Lloyd's face as
she saw the admiring glance he cast boldly at Ida.

"He needn't have gone so far out of his way to have done that,"
exclaimed Lloyd, as they started up the road toward Locust. "It was the
clerk's place to open the doah, and he nearly knocked him down, trying
to get there first."

"Who?" inquired Ida, innocently. She was several steps in advance, and
could not see Lloyd's face.

"That horrid Mistah Ned Bannon. I can't bea'h him. Papa Jack told mothah
she must nevah invite him to the house, undah any circumstances, because
he wasn't fit for Betty and me to know, and--"

She stopped abruptly, for Ida turned with a white, pained face.

"Oh, Lloyd!" she cried. "How can you hurt me so? Don't believe any of
those dreadful things you hear about him!" Then, seeing from Lloyd's
amazed expression that she failed to understand the situation, she
added, in a distressed tone, "_He_ is _Edwardo_."

If Ida had struck her on the face she could not have been more amazed.
She stood staring at her helplessly, unable to say a word.

"I must be dreaming all this," she thought. "After awhile I'll surely
wake up and find I've had a horrible nightmare."

But the distress in Ida's voice was too real to be a dream. She was
biting her lips to keep back the tears. After one look into Lloyd's
dismayed face she turned away and began moving slowly on toward Locust.
Lloyd walked beside her, mechanically. She could not shake off the
feeling that she must be in a dream. From time to time she cast a
half-frightened glance toward Ida. She felt that she had wounded her so
deeply that nothing she might say could ever make amends. When she saw a
tear course slowly down her cheek and splash down on the bunch of
flowers on her coat, she clasped her arm impulsively, saying, "Oh,
Violet, deah, _don't_ cry! I wouldn't have hurt you for worlds. I didn't
have the faintest idea that _he_ was the one."

"It isn't so much what you said," answered Ida, controlling her voice
with an effort, "but I'd counted so much on your friendship for him. And
now to know that people have prejudiced you against him before you've
had a chance to meet him and find out for yourself that they're
mistaken--" She stopped with a sob. "Under all his wild ways he's good
and noble and true at heart, and it isn't fair for everybody to condemn
him for what he has done, and stand in his way when he's trying so hard
to do better."

One little hand in the muff was bare, and Lloyd saw the gleam of the
pearl on it as Ida took out her handkerchief and dabbed it hastily
across her eyes. It brought back all that scene in the moonlighted
orchard, and Ida's blushing confession: "He says that is what my life
means to him--a pearl. That if it wasn't for my love and prayers he
wouldn't care what became of him or what he did. Do you blame me for
disregarding aunt's wishes?" And again as on that night the Little
Colonel's heart swelled with an indignant "No!" Again she arrayed
herself beside her friend, ready to do battle for her against the whole
world if necessary.

Wonderfully comforted by Lloyd's protests of sympathy and understanding,
Ida dried her eyes and looked back over her shoulder, saying, "He's not
in sight yet. I told him not to start for fifteen minutes, and then to
come the long way, around through Tanglewood, so nobody could think he
was following us. That will give you time to show me over the house."

As Lloyd swung open the entrance gate and started down the long avenue,
a queer feeling crept over her that she could not have expressed had she
tried. It seemed to her that the old trees were almost human, and
stretched out their bare branches toward her with an offering of
protection and welcome that was like the greeting of old friends. Yet
at the same time she felt the silent challenge of these old family
sentinels, and involuntarily answered it by a slight lifting of the head
and a trifle more erectness of carriage as she passed. They seemed to
expect it of her, that she should walk past them, as all the Lloyds had
walked, with the proud consciousness that none could gainsay their
countersign of gentle birth and breeding which spoke even in their
tread.

It was the first time she had been back to Locust since the beginning of
school, and Ida felt some subtle change in her as soon as they passed
inside the great gate. The Little Colonel's personality asserted itself
as it had not at the seminary. There she was Ida's adoring little
shadow, completely under the spell of her influence. Here, swayed by the
stronger influence of old associations, she was herself again; the same
well-poised, imperious little creature that she was when she first
coolly "bearded the lion in his den, the Douglas in his hall," and
brought the old Colonel to unconditional surrender.

Mom Beck came up from the servants' cottage and unlocked the house for
them, and after reading her the list of articles to be packed, Lloyd
left her in the linen-room and began a tour of the house. In the
pleasure of acting as hostess and showing Ida the attractions of Locust,
she would have forgotten that an unwelcome guest was on his way, had not
Ida's restless glances from every front window they passed, reminded
her.

The quarter of an hour was almost over when she led the way into the
long drawing-room, which she had reserved until last. "Of co'se it
doesn't look as it does when we are living heah. It makes such a
difference having the curtains down and the furniture covahed; but I
want you to see my harp." She I began slipping the cover from the tall
burnished frame.

"It belonged to my grandmothah Amanthis, and I am proudah of it than
anything I own. That's her portrait ovah the mantel. Isn't she
beautiful? Somehow I nevah can call her just grandmothah, as if she were
an old lady. She nevah lived to be one, you know. I always have to add
her name, Amanthis, and I think of her as she looks there in the
pictuah, the young girl she was when grandfathah first saw her, a June
rose in her hair and anothah at her throat. 'The fairest flowah in all
Kentucky,' he told me once. That's always seemed such a sweet romance to
me. She wasn't much oldah than you when he brought her here a bride. He
always talks about her when the locusts bloom, for they were in blossom
then, and the avenue was white with them."

Lloyd had expected more outspoken admiration from Ida when she showed
her the portrait, and was disappointed to have her barely glance up at
it, murmuring, "Yes, she is lovely," in an absent-minded way, and then
hurry to the window, exclaiming, "Oh, there he is. I can see him just
coming in at the gate."

Lloyd's glance followed Ida's, and, stepping back from the window, she
began hastily drawing the cover over the harp.

"Oh, don't put it on yet," said Ida. "I want to show it to him." Lloyd
hesitated an instant, then stammered confusedly, "But--but--oh, Ida, I'm
_so_ sorry, but don't you see, I can't ask him into the house."

"Why not?" cried Ida. "You promised on the way up here you'd do anything
you could for me."

Tears of distress gathered in the Little Colonel's eyes. It was
impossible to answer Ida's question without wounding her deeply, for it
was in this very room she had heard her grandfather say: "It's a pity Cy
Bannon's youngest boy is such a profligate. Why, sir, he isn't worth the
powder and shot that would put an end to his worthless existence. I
wouldn't let him darken my doors, sir!" And it was in this room also
that she had heard her father say: "No, Elizabeth, for the judge's sake
I'd like to show Ned some attention, and some families do receive him.
But his unprincipled conduct bars him out here. He's a fellow whom I
never could permit Lloyd to know."

Ida repeated her question. "Oh, Violet," cried Lloyd, "it's just
breaking my heart to refuse you, but I can't let him come in. It isn't
my house, and I've no right to when grandfathah and Papa Jack have both
forbidden it. But it's warmah on the poa'ch than it is in the house with
no fiah, and I'll put some chairs out for you, and wait for you in
heah."

"Won't you even come out and be introduced?"

"Oh, Violet, _don't_ ask me!" begged the Little Colonel. "I'd like to
for your sake, but I can't. I simply can't!"

"Why not? Are you going to let your father's prejudices stand in the
way? He doesn't know him as I do. He's just taken a dislike to him as
aunt has done on account of things he's heard. It's unfair! It's unjust
to condemn him on account of other people's mistaken opinions and
prejudices."

The Little Colonel wavered. Ida's absolute trust made it seem possible
that she might be right and everybody else mistaken. She peered out of
the window again. He was half-way up the avenue now, sauntering along at
a leisurely gait with a cigarette in his mouth.

"Besides," continued Ida, "nobody need ever know you have met him. It's
easy enough to keep it secret, so what's the difference--"

She stopped in the middle of her sentence, surprised by the change in
the Little Colonel's manner. She had drawn herself up haughtily, and in
her fearless scorn bore a strong resemblance to the portrait of the
soldier-boy in gray in the frame above her.

"I hope," she said, slowly, "that I have too much respect for the family
honah to do such an undahhanded thing as that. Do you think that I'd be
willing to be the only one of all the Lloyds who couldn't be trusted?"

"Why, Princess, I don't see what's changed you so suddenly," said Ida.
"I haven't asked you to do anything more than you've been doing all
along, by letting me use your post-office box."

"But I nevah would have done that" cried Lloyd, "if I'd have known who
yoah Edwardo was, and now I've found out that it is some one that Papa
Jack disapproves of, of co'se I can't carry yoah lettahs any moah."

"Oh, Princess, I thought _you'd_ stand by me against the whole world!"
sobbed Ida. "I had counted so much--just these few days he'll be here in
the Valley--on seeing him up here. I didn't think _you'd_ be
unreasonable and unjust. It seems as if it would break my heart to have
my only friend fail me now."

The tears were streaming down Lloyd's face, too, but she clenched her
hands and shook her head stubbornly. "No, tell him he can't come heah
again, and that he mustn't send any moah lettahs to my address."

Without another word Ida turned and walked out to the porch, where she
stood waiting behind the bare vines that twined the pillars for Edwardo
to come to her. All the pretty colour had died out of her face, and
Lloyd felt in a sudden spasm of remorse that she was responsible for the
tears in the beautiful eyes and the look of trouble on the face that
only a little while before had been aglow with happiness. The odour of a
cigarette floated in through the hall. Then Ida closed the door, and the
two sat down on the step outside.

Lloyd paced up and down the long room with her hands behind her back.
There was an ache in her throat. She was so miserably disappointed in
Edwardo, so miserably sorry for Ida. More than all, she was miserably
sorry for herself; for the friendship which she had counted one of the
most beautiful things of her life lay in ruins. For a moment she doubted
if she had done right to shirk the obligations it had laid upon her, and
wondered if it were not a greater sacrifice than her father ought to
expect her to make for him. The temptation pressed sorely upon her to go
to Ida and tell her she would stand by her as she had promised, and for
a few days longer, at least, be the bearer of their letters. She even
started toward the door; but half-way across the room some compelling
force drew her eyes toward the portrait of Amanthis, and she stood
still, looking into the depths of the clear, true eyes which had given
counsel to more than one troubled heart.

Years before, the old Colonel, standing with his head bowed on the
mantel, had murmured, brokenly, "Oh, Amanthis, tell me what to do!" and,
obedient to the silent message of that straightforward gaze, had started
off through the falling snow to be reconciled to his only daughter. And
now Lloyd, looking up in the same way, no longer had any doubts about
her duty.

"It wouldn't be right, would it!" she murmured. "_You_ nevah did
anything you had to hide. _You_ wouldn't stoop to anything clandestine."
She straightened herself up proudly, and wiped her eyes. "Neithah will
I, no mattah what it costs me not to!" Then she went on, brokenly, as if
talking to a living presence: "Oh, it's so pitiful for her to be so
deceived in him; for of co'se grandfathah and Papa Jack and her aunt and
everybody put togethah couldn't be mistaken. And I love her so much; I
wish mothah were here, or Papa Jack--but I'll promise _you_, Grandmothah
Amanthis, I'll nevah make you ashamed of me again. I wouldn't have
carried the lettahs if I had known, and you can trust me always aftah
this, for evah and evah."

It seemed to Lloyd that an approving smile rested on the girlish face,
and a red streak of light from the wintry sunset, stealing in through
the uncurtained window, shone across the June rose at her throat till it
burned for the moment with the live red of a living rose.

She slipped the cover on the harp again, and taking one more look around
the room at every familiar object grown dear from years of happy
associations, she closed the door softly and stole up-stairs to rejoin
Mom Beck. She felt as if she had been to a funeral and had suddenly
grown very old and worldly wise--years older and wiser than when she
started blithely up to Locust an hour or two before.

It was late when she and Mom Beck came down-stairs again. The sunset
glow had almost faded from the sky. They bolted the front door and went
out the back, Mom Beck taking the key again.

"Ida is waiting for me on the front poa'ch," Lloyd explained. "Good-bye,
Mom Beck. I'm mighty homesick to come back to you all."

"Good-bye, honey," responded the faithful old soul. "I'm going to bring
you some prawlines in the mawnin'. Ole Becky knows what'll cheer up her
baby."

Lloyd paused at the corner of the porch. "I think we ought to go now,"
she called.

"In a minute," answered Ida. "I'll catch up with you."

Lloyd walked on slowly by herself, down the avenue, through the gate,
beside the railroad track. She was in sight of the depot before Ned
Bannon struck off across a field and Ida joined her. She did not speak
as they hurried on toward the seminary, and Lloyd felt, with a desolate
sinking of the heart, that the old intimacy could never be resumed.




CHAPTER XII.

GHOST OR GIRL


ALLISON, struggling into her jacket as she ran, hurried along the path
through Clovercroft to overtake Kitty and Katie on their way home at
noon.

"Wait!" she called, waving her gloves frantically to attract their
attention as they looked back from the woodland gate.

"I have some news for you." She was almost breathless when she caught up
with them.

"What do you think of this? Ida and Lloyd have had a falling out of some
kind. Neither one will say what it's about, but they don't have anything
more to do with each other, and Ida has resigned from the Shadow Club.
She told me just now to tell you all that she couldn't come any more,
and that we might as well invite somebody else to join in her place. She
didn't give any reason for leaving, and you know when she puts on that
dignified, grown-up air of hers, one doesn't feel at liberty to ask
questions. I told her I was sorry, and started to beg her to change her
mind, but she wouldn't listen; just smiled in a mournful sort of way as
if she had lost her last friend, and hurried past me.

"I asked Betty if she knew what was the matter, and she said it must be
a quarrel of some kind, for Lloyd was dreadfully unhappy. After she came
back from Locust yesterday evening she threw herself across the bed and
cried, and cried, and wouldn't tell what for. She wouldn't go down to
supper, either, and afterward, when Betty fixed her something on the
chafing-dish, she barely tasted it."

"We'll have a gay old club meeting to-morrow," said Katie, "with Ida
gone and Lloyd in the dumps and Betty unable to come, on account of her
cold--"

"And her head so full of the book she's writing that she can't take any
interest in anything else," interrupted Kitty. "It's too bad that
there's only half a club left. Three of us can't get enough things ready
to have a fair by Easter."

"That isn't the worst of it," answered Katie. "The three of us alone
never can get even with Mittie Dupong and carry out our hoodoo plot to
punish her, because we are all outside of the seminary. I'm tired of
having the girls laugh whenever they see me eating an apple and make
remarks about C. D."

"And I'm tired of hearing everlastingly about that old valentine!"
chimed in Kitty. "If the other girls won't help us I think we ought to
act on Ida's suggestion and take in some new members who would."

"Lucy Smith would be glad to join in Ida's place," said Allison. "She
rooms across the hall from Mittie, and she'd dare do anything that we
would suggest."

"And Retta Long's room is just above, and she's a good friend of ours,"
added Kitty. "Let's talk it over with Betty and Lloyd as soon as we get
back to the seminary after dinner, and if they're willing we'll swear in
the new members at recess."

"All right," assented Katie. "I'll hurry back and meet you here at the
depot as soon as I get through dinner. We'll settle this before night."

But much running back and forth and consulting and discussing was
necessary before the new addition to the club was in full working order.
Lloyd and Betty were willing to admit Retta and Lucy, but Retta and Lucy
were not willing to join unless their roommates were included in the
invitation; and their roommates, Dora Deersly and Rose Parker, were not
willing to spend any time in making fancy articles for the fair. It was
too near the holidays, they said. They needed all their spare time for
the presents they were trying to finish before Christmas.

"Couldn't they be sort of honorary members, and not have to work?"
suggested Kitty. "They needn't even meet with us on Saturdays, if
they'll help us play ghost to scare Mittie."

"Yes, there are some secret societies, like the Masons, that have
different orders," Allison said. "Why couldn't we have, too? We'll be
one kind of shadow, the kind that casts the influence, and the other
four can be another kind and do the mischief. We can call ourselves the
G. G.'s for good ghosts. Betty, can't you fix up something for the
others?"

"Yes," answered Betty, "if you'll give me enough time."

She turned to the little note-book she always carried, and began looking
over a list of words on the last page. The girls often laughed at
Betty's devotion to the dictionary. Frequently they found her poring
over its pages, picking out new words that pleased her fancy, as they
would pick out the kernels of a nut, and jotting them down for future
use.

"Here it is," she cried, presently, "wraith! It means spirit or
apparition. They can be the wicked wraiths--the W. W.'s. No," she added,
as another chosen word caught her eye. "They can be the W. V.'s.
Wraiths of Vengeance; that sounds better. That will fit in with the
story of the veiled lady who haunts the seminary, because it is supposed
she comes back to try to wreak vengeance on the people who wronged her.
Allison, you tell little Elise that story to-night, and let her spread
it among the primary grades, and it'll be all over the school by the
time the girls are ready to perform, that the Wraith of Vengeance has
been seen again, floating near Mittie Dupong's door."

There was no regular meeting of the Shadow Club that Saturday. Mrs.
Walton had not been taken into the secret of the Wraiths of Vengeance,
and when it was explained to her that Betty had a cold and could not
come, and Lloyd and Ida had had a misunderstanding and were not on good
terms, she was quite willing to compensate the girls for their
disappointment by inviting Lucy Smith and Retta Long to tea.

Some of the neighbours came in to spend the evening, so Allison and
Kitty took their guests up-stairs to make some experiments with a magic
lantern which had often afforded them amusement. Little Elise, who had
seen all the pictures many times before, went back to the library, and
Barbry soon finished her evening duties up-stairs; so no one ever knew
just what those experiments were.

Among the slides was a picture of Lot's wife; a tall, white figure with
a half-lifted veil, turning for a backward look. The lurid flames of
burning Sodom glowed in the background the first time Lucy and Retta saw
it thrown upon the wall, but the last time it was changed into a ghostly
figure that made those Wraiths of Vengeance dance for joy. Allison, with
a thick coat of black paint, had carefully covered all the background,
blotting out everything in the circle except the figure itself, which
stood out with startling distinctness. Then from the top of a
step-ladder they practised throwing it from the transom of Allison's
room through the opposite transom of the room across the hall.

"It will be even easier than this at the seminary," said Lucy, "for the
hall between Mittie's room and mine is narrower, and the transoms are
lower. That will throw the figure directly above the foot of Mittie's
bed. I think it will be all the better that we have to throw it high,
for it will give the floating effect the veiled lady is famous for, to
have the head so near the ceiling. I'll have to lay in a stock of
provisions so that I need not go down to supper Monday night. Then while
everybody is in the dining-room I'll hide the step-ladder under my bed,
and experiment with the lantern from my transom to get exactly the right
position."

"What if Mittie shouldn't wake up when you flash it in?" suggested
Allison.

Retta was equal to providing for such an emergency. "I'll set my watch
with Lucy's," she said, "and at exactly the moment we agree upon, I'll
tap on Mittie's window just below mine with a bottle let down on a
string. I'll give three sepulchral knocks, then wait a minute and give
three more. I should think that an empty bottle knocking against the
glass would give a hollow sort of sound. That's the window we always
keep open at night."

"When it's time for Barbry to take you home," said Allison, "we'll go,
too, and help carry the lantern. Now this is a case of our shadow-selves
being where we can not. We can't do the actual scaring, but it's our
lantern that's going to cast the shadow that will make Mittie Dupong
afraid to listen again as long as she lives."

It took considerable self-denial on Lucy's part to forego supper when
the time came to carry out the plan, but the spirit of mischief was
stronger than her appetite. She was rewarded by finding the daintiest of
luncheons in the box Allison left upon her table, and as she sat down
to enjoy it after bringing in the step-ladder from the chambermaid's
supply-closet and making her experiments, she thought the Order of
Wraiths was a most excellent thing to which to belong.

Although midnight is the prescribed time for all ghostly visitants,
these wraiths had arranged for a much earlier appearing. It would cost
too great an effort to keep awake until that witching hour. It was not
more than half-past ten, although the seminary had been in darkness and
silence for an hour, when Retta leaned out of her window, dangling an
empty shoe-polish bottle on the end of a long string. It swung against
Mittie's window just below with three hollow knocks. Ten seconds after
by Lucy's watch the knocking was repeated. She could not hear it from
her room, but her faith in Retta's punctuality in carrying out her part
of the programme made her send a dazzling circle of light from the
lantern she was manipulating, to rest on the wall above the foot of
Mittie's bed.

Mittie sat up in bed, too startled to utter a sound. The light instantly
disappeared and a white-veiled figure took its place. To her horror she
could distinctly see the dark wall-paper through its ghostly
outlines. She buried her face in the bedclothes with a moan of terror.

[Illustration: "MITTIE SAT UP IN BED, TOO STARTLED TO UTTER A SOUND."]

"What's the matter, Mittie?" asked her roommate, from the opposite bed,
who had been aroused by the knocking and the light, but had not opened
her eyes until she heard the moan. The sound of a human voice gave
Mittie courage to look out again. The apparition was gone.

"Oh," she quavered, "I must have been dreaming. I thought there was a
knocking at the window, then there was a blinding light, and the next
instant the veiled lady seemed to float across the room at the foot of
my bed. I never was so frightened in my life. My tongue is stiff yet,
and I am all in a shiver. Oh, it was awful!"

"It must have been the potato salad you ate for supper," answered Sara,
drowsily; but as she spoke the three slow knocks sounded again at the
window, and she raised herself on her elbow to listen.

"Oo-oo-oh! There it is again!" wailed Mittie, burrowing under the
bedclothes again. The hair fairly rose on Sara's head as the outlines of
a veiled figure appeared above the foot of Mittie's bed, floating
hesitatingly a little space, and then vanished. In a flash Sara had
disappeared from view also, and lay almost smothered under the
blankets, so rigid with fear that she dared not move a muscle. She held
herself motionless until she began to ache. It seemed hours before
either one dared look out again, although it was barely five minutes.

"It was the hoodoo beginning to work," gasped Sara, in a hoarse whisper.
"Oh, if I ever live through this night I tell you I'll get out of this
room in the morning, Mittie Dupong. I'll never spend another night with
a girl that's marked for the haunts to follow."

It was hours before they fell asleep, for they kept opening their eyes
to assure themselves that the apparition had not reappeared. Even in
broad daylight the memory of their fright was not a pleasant thing to
think about. It required all the persuasion that Mittie could bring to
bear, and the gift of a coral fan-chain to prevail upon Sara not to go
to the teachers with the matter. She finally consented to room with
Mittie one more night, but announced in case the ghost came back she'd
certainly alarm the seminary.

"But if the teachers found out that I really was marked that way,"
sobbed Mittie, "they'd go to investigating, and find out about my
eavesdropping, and they wouldn't let me stay in the school, if the
spirits made such a disturbance about it."

Sara promised secrecy, but while no hint of the appearance reached the
faculty, every girl in the seminary heard of it before night. Nothing
was talked of but table-tippings and spirit-rapping and "appearances."
No ghostly visitant disturbed Mittie's and Sara's slumbers the second
night. The Shadow Club, in secret session, decided it would not be safe
to venture again so soon. But a spirit of unrest seemed to pervade the
whole seminary. Mischievous girls knocked on the walls to see their
roommates turn pale. Cold hands reached suddenly out of dark corners to
clutch unwary passers-by, and a panic spread in a single evening among
the pupils, more contagious than mumps or measles. Every one not
infected with the fear seemed infected with a desire to make some one
else afraid.

Even gentle little Jean Wilson, whose deportment was always perfect, and
who was too tender-hearted to watch a spider killed, so the girls
declared, felt moved to do something. Her roommate, Ada Day, loudly
proclaimed that _she_ was not afraid of spooks, and she didn't have any
patience with girls who were silly enough to believe such tales. Nothing
could frighten _her_!

While Ada was in the bath-room that evening, Jean emptied a tin box of
talcum powder, slipped a spool of thread inside, and drawing the end of
the thread through one of the holes in the perforated lid, hid the box
in the springs of Ada's bed. The black thread trailing across the carpet
to Jean's pillow was not visible in the dimly lighted room when Ada came
back and found Jean lying with her eyes closed. She did not turn up the
lamp, but began undressing as quietly as possible, and was soon in bed
herself. Both girls were wakeful that night. Both heard the clock strike
several times. Ada tossed and turned whenever she roused, but Jean lay
as quiet as possible, breathing regularly, so that Ada thought she was
asleep and did not venture to speak.

As the clock in the lower hall stopped striking twelve, Jean reached for
the thread fastened to her pillow by a pin, and gave it several quick
uneven jerks. The spool rattling in the tin box sounded like the
mysterious rappings at which Ada had turned up her nose. To hear it thus
in the dead of night was a different matter to Ada.

"Jean!" she called, in a hoarse stage-whisper. "Jean! Did you hear that?
What do you suppose it is?"

Jean gave the thread another tweak, and then answered, in the same loud
whisper, "It sounds to me as if something was trying to spell your name
by tapping. It comes from under your bed, but then of course you don't
believe in such things. It may be a warning."

"I wish I dared put my foot out of bed," said Ada, her teeth chattering.
"I'd get up and make a light. You do it, Jean. I'd do that much for you
if the noise was under your bed."

"Sh!" warned Jean. "I believe something is really calling you. It's
certainly spelling your name. Now count. One knock--that is A. One, two,
three, four--D. One again--A. Yes, that spelled Ada. Now it's beginning
again. One, two, three, four--D. One--A." The knocks followed in rapid
succession until Ada, realizing that they were going all the way to Y,
was almost paralyzed with terror.

"Oh, Jean!" she wailed. "Stop it! Stop it! Get up and make a light, or
call the matron, or something! I can't stand it a minute longer! I'll be
a gibbering idiot if you don't stop that awful knocking!"

Jean still continued to jerk the thread, till she heard Ada spring up
desperately as if to jump out of bed. Then she said, "Oh, do be still,
Ada Day. It's nothing but a spool in a tin box. See! I'll strike a match
and show you. I was only playing a trick on you because you boasted
nothing could frighten you. Don't rouse the house, for mercy's sake."

It took much time and much pleading on Jean's part to convince Ada that
there was really no spirit under her bed, and then it took more time and
pleading to appease her anger. The sound of voices and the striking of a
match aroused the matron. She lay for a moment, wondering what was the
matter; then, thinking that some one might be ill and in need of her
services, she got up, slipped on a warm bathrobe and her felt bedroom
slippers, and stepped out into the hall to investigate.

All was quiet, but she had a feeling that some mischief was afloat. An
inkling of the disturbing element in the school had reached her early in
the day, and although she had said nothing to the teachers, she had made
a careful round of inspection just before going to bed. Some rumour of
the doings of the Shadow Club which had come to her made her go to the
west wing and push aside the portière hanging over the door that led to
the outside stairway. The bolt was in place, but it slipped easily in
its sheath as if it had lately been oiled. Selecting a key on the ring
at her belt, she locked the door. "I'll risk a fire for one night," she
thought, "but I can't risk some other things."

Although the hall was quiet when she stepped out now in the midnight
silence, some feeling that all was not right made her slip on down the
front stairs. There was no light, excepting a faint starlight, that
served to show where the windows were. As she stood there listening,
about to strike a match, something in white brushed down the stairs past
her. Half in a spirit of mischief, thinking to pay the girl or ghost,
whichever it was, back in her own coin, the matron threw her arms around
the sheeted figure.

There was a muffled scream of terror. But, holding her captive fast with
one strong hand, the matron struck a match with the other.

"Hush!" she said. "There's no use in disturbing everybody." Then as the
match flared up she saw that it was no Wraith of Vengeance she held. The
sheet fell to the floor, revealing Ida Shane, dressed even to hat and
furs, and carrying her leather travelling-bag.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE SHADOW CLUB IN DISGRACE


"THE president wishes to see the members of the Shadow Club in his
office immediately. They will please pass out before we proceed with the
opening exercises."

That was the announcement Professor Fowler made in chapel next morning,
and a clap of thunder from a clear sky could not have been more
unexpected or more startling in its effect. A frightened silence
pervaded the room so deep that every girl could hear her heart beat. A
message to Doctor Wells's office at that hour was almost unheard of. He
always conducted the chapel exercises himself. It must be a matter of
grave importance indeed that would cause his absence now, and the
sending of such a message.

Lloyd and Betty exchanged startled glances, then slowly rose, followed
by Allison and Kitty. Katie stood up next and looked back with a giggle
at Lucy, Retta, Rose and Dora, who, being only of the Order of W. V.'s,
hesitated to follow. But emphatic beckonings brought them to their feet,
and they filed out into the hall after the other girls, their heads held
high, and smiling as if indifferent to the whisperings around them.

But the instant the door closed upon them and they found themselves
alone in the hall outside, they began demanding of each other the reason
for the summons.

"You needn't ask _me_!" exclaimed Lucy. "We didn't do a thing last night
on our side of the building. I've no more idea than a chipmunk why we
were sent for."

"Nothing happened in our wing," protested Betty and Lloyd, in the same
breath.

"Oh, girls, I'm all in a shake!" exclaimed Retta Long, almost in tears.
"It frightens me nearly to death to think of being called up before the
president. Such a thing never happened to me before, nor to any of our
family."

"Oh, boo!" exclaimed Kitty, with a reassuring smile. "We haven't done
anything so killing bad that we need care. We've only had a little fun.
Come on! I'm not afraid of all the king's horses and all the king's
men."

But in spite of her brave words she sat down as shyly as the rest of
them when Doctor Wells, tall and commanding, motioned them to seats in
front of his desk. He looked so big and dignified, standing before them
erect and silent, while he waited for them to be seated, that her
courage failed her. But when he sat down in his armchair and looked
gravely from one frightened face to the other, Kitty saw a twinkle in
the kind eyes behind the spectacles which reassured her.

"We caught a ghost in the seminary last night, young ladies," he began,
abruptly, with a smile twitching an instant at the corners of his mouth.
It was only for an instant. His face was unusually grave as he
proceeded. "It was just in time to prevent a very serious occurrence
which would have been a great calamity to the school. It made a partial
confession which implicated some one in your club, and I have sent for
you in order that you may clear yourselves at once. Most of your
mischief has been only innocent amusement, I know, but I must have a
complete history of the club, from the beginning six weeks ago, up till
twelve o'clock last night."

At mention of a ghost, they looked at each other with startled faces,
wondering how much he already knew. Evidently some one outside of the
club had been playing their own game, and they wondered who could have
made a confession which could truthfully have included them.
Instinctively they turned to Betty to be their spokesman. With her
truthful brown eyes looking straight into the doctor's, Betty clasped
her hands in her lap and gave a simple account of the club.

She began with the verse Miss Edith had written in their albums, and the
story she had told them of the girls who walked forty miles to the
mountain school. She told of the impulse it had awakened in them to do
something for the mountain people, and the club that had grown out of
that desire.

"We didn't intend to play any pranks in the beginning," she said; "all
we wanted to do was to cast our shadow-selves where we could never be.
But just after Hallowe'en we met in our room one Saturday afternoon, and
a girl hid in the closet next to ours and heard all our secrets and went
and told them, and we decided to shadow _her_ awhile, to punish her for
being so mean. But one-half of the club lived outside the seminary, and
Ida Shane resigned about that time, so we established a new order, and
took these four girls in as Wraiths of Vengeance." She nodded toward the
new members.

A grim smile flitted across the doctor's face as he listened to her
explanation of their duties, and heard the use they had made of Lot's
wife and the magic lantern. But he smoothed his white moustache to cover
his amusement, and when she finished he sat in deep thought a moment,
his brows drawn closely together.

"If there was any ghost around last night, we weren't responsible for
its doings," she added. "It didn't belong to the club."

"Why did Ida Shane resign?" he asked, suddenly.

"I don't know, sir," answered Betty. "She wouldn't tell."

"There must have been a reason," he continued, sternly. "Do you know,
Kitty?"

"No, sir."

"Do you, Katie?"

"No, sir."

The same question and the same answer passed down the line until it came
to Lloyd. She blushed a vivid scarlet and hesitated.

"Yes, I know," she exclaimed. "But I am not at liberty to tell."

The president held out part of a torn envelope, on which was written
with many flourishes in a bold, masculine hand, "Lloydsboro Seminary.
Kindness of bearer."

"Have any of you seen this handwriting before?" he asked.

The envelope was passed from hand to hand, each girl shaking her head in
denial, until it came to Lloyd. With a sick sinking of heart she
recognized the familiar penmanship that had been such a bugbear, and
which she had hoped never to see again. All the colour faded from her
face as she faintly acknowledged that it was familiar.

"That is all," he said, carelessly tossing the paper back on the desk.
"I am glad to find that the club, as a club, is in no way accountable
for the affair that I mentioned. I shall have to forbid any more games
of ghost, however, and must ask the owners of the magic lantern to take
their property home."

He kept them a moment longer, with a few earnest words which they never
could forget, they were so fatherly, so helpful, and inspiring. They
went away with a higher value of the motive of their little club and its
power to influence others; and an earnest purpose to measure up to the
high standard he set for them, made them quiet and thoughtful all that
morning.

"Just a moment, please, Lloyd," he said, as she was about to pass out
with the others. "There's another matter about which I wish to speak to
you."

She dropped into her seat again. When the last girl had passed out,
closing the door behind her, he picked up the scrap of envelope again,
saying, "I must ask you one more question, Lloyd. _Where_ have you seen
this handwriting before?"

She looked up at him imploringly. "Oh, please, Doctah Wells," she
begged, "don't ask me! I'm not at liberty to tell that, eithah. I
promised that I wouldn't, on my honah, you know."

"But it is imperative that I should know," he answered, sternly. "You
are here in my charge, and I have the right to demand an answer."

"I am in honah bound not to tell," she repeated, a trifle defiantly,
although her lips quivered. "It would get some one else into trouble,
and I have to refuse, even if you expel me for it."

The doctor and the old Colonel had been friends since their youth, and
he recognized the "Lloyd stubbornness" now in the firmly set mouth and
the poise of the head.

"My dear child," he said, kindly, seeing a tear begin to steal from
under her long lashes. "It is for your own sake, in the absence of your
parents, and for the sake of the school's reputation, that I am obliged
to make these inquiries. The somebody whom you are trying to shield is
already in trouble, and your telling or not telling can make no
difference now."

Lloyd looked up in alarm.

"Yes, it was Ida Shane whom the matron discovered trying to steal out of
the seminary last night. Ned Bannon was waiting outside to take her on
the fast express to Cincinnati. They were to have been married there
this morning at his cousin's had they not been interrupted in their
plans."

Lloyd gave a gasp, and the tree outside the window seemed to be going
round and round.

"We have telegraphed for her aunt. She will be here this afternoon to
take her home, and the affair will be ended as far as the seminary is
concerned. Now what I must know, is just what connection have you had
with it. Ida confessed that a member of the Shadow Club had helped her
carry on a clandestine correspondence for awhile, but for some reason
suddenly refused to be the bearer of their letters any longer. It was
for that reason, she said, feeling that her only friend had failed her,
that she consented to the elopement, which happily has been prevented."

"Oh, Doctah Wells! Do _you_ think I am to blame for it?" cried Lloyd,
wishing that the ground would open and swallow her if he should say yes.

"It was so hard to know what to do! It neahly broke my heart to refuse
her, but--it was this way."

With the tears running down her face she poured out the whole story,
from the beginning of her devotion to Ida, to the day when, under her
grandmother's portrait she fought the battle between her love for her
friend and loyalty to the family honour.

"There wasn't anybody to tell me," she sobbed at the last. "And if I was
wrong and am to blame for Ida's running away, nobody will evah trust me
again!"

A very tender smile flashed across the doctor's stern face and the eyes
gleamed through the spectacles with a kinder light than she had ever
seen in them, as he leaned forward to say:

"I have known George Lloyd many, many years, my child, and I want to say
that he has never had more reason to be proud of anything in his life
than that his little granddaughter, under such a test, recognized the
right and stood true to the traditions of an old and honourable family
when it cost her a friendship that she held very dear. Just now Ida
feels that she has been cruelly used, and that her happiness is wrecked
for life; but in time she will see differently. Poor mistaken child! I
talked with her this morning. Ned is only a selfish, overgrown boy, with
many bad habits, and like many another of his kind knows that the plea
that she is reforming him is the strongest argument he can use in
influencing her. He tells her she is doing that, but to my certain
knowledge he has not given up a single vice since he has known her. She
thinks that it is her duty to cling to him. I admire her devotion in one
way, but it makes her blind to every other duty. She is too infatuated
to be able to judge between the right and wrong, and at present feels
bitter toward the whole world.

"But by and by, when she grows wiser and learns that the judgment of a
sixteen-year-old girl in such matters cannot safely be trusted, she will
be glad that you helped bring the affair to a crisis. When she has
outgrown her infatuation she will see that you have done her a kindness
instead of a wrong, and she will thank you deeply."

Lloyd had not felt so light-hearted for days, as when she left the
president's office, both on her own account and Ida's. When she went
into the class-room it was with such a bright face that every one felt
the message to the Shadow Club must have been some mark of especial
honour.

When Doctor Wells thought the affair ended as far as the seminary was
concerned, he had not taken the newspapers into account.

No one could guess where they got their information. Friday morning a
Louisville paper came out to the Valley with startling headlines:
"_Pretty Schoolgirl at Lloydsboro Valley Attempts to Elope with Son of
Prominent Judge! Granddaughter of Well-Known Kentucky Colonel Plays
Important Part! Shadow Club in Disgrace! Ghosts and Lovers vs. Good
Behaviour and Learning!_"

No names were mentioned, but the badly garbled account made a buzz of
wonder and criticism in the Valley. Doctor Wells came into chapel
looking worried and haggard. He simply stated the facts of the case and
held up the paper with the false account, speaking of the effect such a
report would have on the school.

"It puts us in a bad light," he said. "The public will say we should
have been more watchful. This will be copied all over the State before
the week is out. One girl has already been ordered home by telegraph on
account of it."

Lloyd did not see the paper until noon. She read it hastily, standing in
the hall, and then ran up to her room to throw herself across her bed in
a violent spell of crying.

"Oh, how could they tell such dreadful stories!" she sobbed to Betty.
"They might as well have published my name in big red lettahs as to have
described Locust and grandfathah so plainly that every one will know who
is meant. He and mothah will be so mawtified! I nevah want to look
anybody in the face again, aftah having such lies copied all ovah the
State about me, as Doctah Wells says they will be. I can't follow them
up and prove to everybody that they are not true, and it's such an awful
disgrace to be talked about that way in the papahs. If grandfathah or
Papa Jack were home I believe they'd shoot that horrid editah!"

The matron came in and tried to comfort her, but she would not listen.
She was in a nervous state when trifles were magnified into great
troubles, and she persisted in thinking that she was too disgraced by
the false report to ever appear in public again. Betty could not coax
her down to dinner, and it was not long before she had cried herself
into a throbbing headache.

Toward the middle of the afternoon, exhausted by her crying, she fell
into such a sound sleep that she did not hear the girls go tramping out
for their daily walk. Betty stole in and looked at her and went
sorrowfully out again. Magnolia Budine, passing the door with her
carpet-bag on the way to the old carryall waiting at the gate, stopped a
moment and listened. It was an exciting tale she was carrying home to
Roney this Friday afternoon. She was glad the sobs had ceased. She had
heard them at noon, and had gone around with the cloud of Lloyd's
trouble resting on her like a heavy burden.

It was nearly dark when Lloyd awoke. Some one was tapping at the door.
Before she could find her voice to say Come in, Mrs. Walton was standing
beside her. It was as if a burst of sunshine had suddenly brightened the
dull November twilight. Lloyd started to scramble up, but Mrs. Walton
insisted on her lying still. Sitting down on the side of the bed, she
began stroking her hot forehead with soft, motherly touches.

"I had a conversation with Doctor Wells over the telephone about that
affair in the paper," she began. "He told me what a state you were in
about it, so I immediately wrote to your mother a full explanation and
sent it off on the two o'clock train, stamped 'special delivery.' She'll
get it as soon as the paper, so put your mind at rest on that point. Now
I've come over to tell you something I found out about you the other
day. You don't even know it yourself. You'll be surprised and glad, I'm
sure. It's quite a story, so I shall have to begin it like one.

"One blustery day last week an old farmer stopped at Clovercroft and
asked to see Miss Katherine. It proved to be Magnolia Budine's father.
He had been there once before with a crock of apple-butter, which he
brought as a sort of thank-offering to Katherine because she had made
Magnolia so happy about the costume and the picture she took of her in
it.

"Katherine said he would have made a striking picture himself as he
stood there with his slouched hat pulled over his ears, a blue woollen
muffler wound around his neck, and an enormous bronze turkey gobbler in
his arms. He wouldn't go in at first, but finally stepped inside out of
the wind, still holding the turkey in his arms.

"It seems that there is a man living on his place who used to be an old
neighbour of the Budines when they lived near Loretta. This man has been
unable to work for some time, and is occupying the cabin free of rent.
He has a daughter about sixteen who is very ill. She is Magnolia's best
friend, and the child was afraid that Roney, as he called her, was going
to die. She wanted her picture above all things, and anything that
Magnolia wants the old fellow evidently makes an effort to get for her.
He seems completely wrapped up in her. So there he stood with his best
bronze gobbler in his arms and tears in his eyes, wanting to know of
Katherine if it would be a sufficient inducement for her to drive over
with him and take the sick girl's picture.

"She told him she never took pictures for pay, and said she would be
glad to do it for nothing if it were not such a bleak day that she was
afraid to ride so far in the cold. He was greatly distressed at his
failure to persuade her to go, for he was afraid that Roney might die
before the weather changed, and then his little girl would be so grieved
that she would never get over it. Katherine was so touched by the old
fellow's disappointment that she relented, and told him she would risk
the cold if I would be willing to go with her. They came by for me, and
I went.

"Oh, Lloyd, I wish you could have seen that poor, bare room where Roney
was lying. It was clean, but so pitifully bare of all that is bright and
comfortable. I looked around and saw not a picture except an unframed
chromo tacked over the mantel, till my eyes happened to rest on the old
wooden clock. There behind its glass door, swinging back and forth on
the pendulum, was _your_ picture; the Princess with the dove."

Lloyd raised herself on one elbow. "_My_ pictuah!" she cried, in
astonishment. "How did it get there?"

"That is what I couldn't help asking Roney. I wish you could have seen
her face light up as she looked at it. 'That's my Princess, Mrs.
Walton,' she said. 'Magnolia gave it to me. You don't know how she has
helped me through the long days and nights. Of course I can't see her in
the dark, but every time the clock ticks I know she is swinging away
there, saying, "For love--will find--a way."'

"I found that Roney's case is one for the King's Daughters to take in
hand. She has a small annuity left her by her mother's family; that is
all her father and she have to live on. That will stop at her death,
and it is her one anxiety that in spite of all her pain she may hang on
to life in order that her father may be provided for. The King's
Daughters sent for a specialist to come out and examine her. He says she
can be cured, so next week we are to move her into Louisville to a
hospital for treatment.

"You never saw such a happy face as hers when we told her. 'Oh,' she
cried, 'I almost gave up last week. The pain was so terrible. I couldn't
have borne it if I hadn't watched the pendulum and, every time it
ticked, said, "I'll stand it one more second for daddy's sake, and one
more, and one more; I'm spinning the golden thread like the Princess,
and love _will_ find a way to help me hang on a little longer!"'

"So you see, dear," said Mrs. Walton, with a playful pat of the cheek,
"your face and Betty's song brought hope and strength to a poor
suffering little soul of whom you never heard. Your shadow-self reached
a long, long way when it brought comfort to Roney and helped keep her
brave. What do you care for this trifle you are crying about? The whole
affair will blow over and be forgotten in a short time. Get up and go to
counting the pendulum with Roney, and sing like the real princess you
are. '_Love_ will find a way' to make us forget the unpleasant things
and remember only the good."

Lloyd sat up and threw both her arms around Mrs. Walton's neck. "You're
the real princess," she said, softly, with a kiss. "For you go about
doing good all the time, like a real king's daughtah."

"Now run along, little girl," said Mrs. Walton, gaily, as Lloyd slipped
off the bed. "Bathe your eyes and pack your satchel. I am going to take
you and Betty home with me to stay until Monday morning."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE THREE WEAVERS


NO better cure could have been found for Lloyd's dejection than her
visit to The Beeches. It was impossible for her to brood over her
troubles while Allison and Kitty were continually saying funny things,
and rushing her from one interesting game to another. After a good
night's sleep the events of the previous day seemed so far away that
what she had considered such a disgrace had somehow lost its sting, and
she wondered how she could have suffered so keenly over it.

Katie Mallard came over soon after breakfast, and they spent nearly the
entire day outdoors. The air was frosty and bracing, and when Mrs.
Walton saw them come running into the house just before sundown with
bright eyes and red cheeks, she felt well pleased with the success of
her plan.

She was sitting in her room by a front window writing letters when the
girls came rushing up the stairs into the adjoining room. Kitty carried
a basket of apples, and Allison some pop-corn and the popper, and
presently an appetizing odour began to steal in as the white grains
danced over the open fire.

As the girls hovered hungrily around, waiting for the popping to cease,
they began a lively discussion which caught Mrs. Walton's attention. She
paused, pen in hand, at the mention of two names, Daisy Dale and the
Heiress of Dorn. They were familiar names, for only the day before Miss
Edith had showed her the pile of books found in Ida's closet, and she
was waiting for a suitable time to speak of them to the girls. As she
folded her letter and addressed it, she decided she would call them in a
little later, when they were through with their apples and their corn,
for a quiet little twilight talk. A golden afterglow gleamed above the
western tree-tops, and, leaning back in her rocking-chair, she sat
watching it fade out, so absorbed in a story she was thinking to tell
them that she ceased to hear the girlish chatter in the next room till
Lloyd's voice rang out clearly:

"I've made up my mind. I'm _nevah_ going to get married!"

"Then you'll be an old maid," was Kitty's teasing rejoinder, "and
people will poke fun at you and your cats and teacups."

"I'll not have any," was the prompt reply. "I nevah expect to have any
moah pets of any kind. Whenevah I get to loving anything, something
always happens to it. Think of all the pets we have had at Locust.
Fritz, and the two Bobs, and Boots, and the gobblah, and the goat, and
the parrot, and deah old Hero! Something happened to every one of them.
The ponies are the only things left, and the only kind of a pet I'd evah
have again. If Tarbaby should die, I'd buy me a hawse, for I don't
expect to be the kind of an old maid that sits in a chimney-cawnah with
a tabby and a teapot. I expect to dash around the country' on hawseback
and have fun even when I'm old and wrinkled and gray. I'll go to
college, of co'se, and I'll have interesting people to visit me, so that
I'll keep up my interest in the world and not get cranky."

"I'll come and live with you," said Allison. "I'll have a studio and
devote my life to making a great artist of myself. We could buy
Tanglewood, and make a moat all around the house so that we could pull
up the drawbridge when we wanted to be alone or were afraid of
burglars."

"Maybe it would be better for me to be an old maid, too," said Betty,
musingly. "I'd have more time to write books than if I had a husband and
a family to look after. And, besides, while I like to read about lovers
and such things in stories, it would make me feel dreadfully foolish to
have any man fall on his knees to me and say the things that Lord Rokeby
and Guy said to Daisy Dale. I don't even like to write those speeches
when I'm in a room by myself. I've tried lots of times, and I've about
decided to skip that part in my story. I'll put some stars instead, and
begin, 'A year has passed, and Gladys and Eugene,' etc."

"I was going to ask mothah how Papa Jack did it," said Lloyd, "but aftah
all that's happened, somehow I'd rathah not say anything about such
things to oldah people. Miss McCannister was so horrified when she found
we had talked such 'sentimental foolishness,' as she called it. I'll
nevah forget the way she screwed up her lips and said, 'It wasn't
considahed propah, when I was a child, for little girls to discuss such
subjects.' I felt as if I had been caught doing something wicked. It
mawtified me dreadfully, and I made up my mind that I'd nevah get to be
fond of anybody the way Ida was, for fear I might be mistaken in them as
she was."

"Everything seems to be a warning lately," said Betty. "Even the
literature lessons this week. If the _Lady of Shalott_ hadn't left her
weaving to look out of the window when Sir Lancelot rode by, the curse
wouldn't have come upon her."

"There!" cried Allison, scrambling to her feet. "That reminds me that I
haven't learned the verses that Miss Edith asked us to memorize for
Monday."

She took a worn copy of Tennyson from the table, and began rapidly
turning the leaves.

"I learned the whole thing yesterday," said Betty. "I can say every word
of part first."

"It's easy," remarked Kitty. "I know part of it, although I'm not in the
class. I learned it from hearing Allison read it:

    "'Four gray walls and four gray towers
     Overlook a space of flowers.
     And the silent isle embowers
        The Lady of Shalott.'

Isn't that right?"

"Yes, but that isn't Monday's lesson. It's part second we have to
learn."

"Let's all learn it," proposed Katie. "It's so pretty and jingles along
so easily I'd like to know it, too. You line it out, Allison, as Frazer
does the hymns at the coloured baptizings, and we'll run a race and see
who can repeat it first."

"There she weaves by night and day," read Allison, and then the five
voices gabbled it all together, "There she weaves by night and day."

The concert recitation went on for some time, and presently the lines of
the familiar old poem began weaving themselves into the story Mrs.
Walton was thinking about. The red gold of the afterglow had not
entirely faded from the sky when she left her seat by the window and
went into the next room. The five girls on the hearth-rug were still
chanting the lesson over and over.

"Come hear us say it, mother," called Kitty, drawing up a chair for her.
"Betty learned it first."

Allison deposited the bowl of pop-corn in her lap and passed her the
basket of apples, and then flourished the popper like a drum-major's
baton. "Now all together!" she cried, and the five voices rang out like
one:

    "There she weaves by night and day
     A magic web with colours gay.
     She has heard a whisper say
     A curse is on her if she stay
         To look down to Camelot.
     She knows not what the curse may be,
     And so she weaveth steadily,
     And little other care hath she.
         The Lady of Shalott.

    "And moving through a mirror clear
     That hangs before her all the year,
     Shadows of the world appear.
     There she sees the highway near,
         Winding down to Camelot.
     There the river eddy whirls,
     And the surly village churls
     And the red cloaks of market-girls
         Pass onward from Shalott.

    "Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
     An abbot on an ambling pad,
     Sometimes a curly shepherd lad
     Or long-haired page in crimson clad
         Goes by to Camelot.
     And sometimes through the mirror blue
     The knights come riding two by two.
     She hath no loyal knight and true,
         The Lady of Shalott."

"Why, she was an old maid! Wasn't she!" said Katie, so plaintively as
they finished that they all laughed.

"That's what Allison and Betty and Lloyd are going to be, mother," said
Kitty, teasingly. Lloyd, with a very red face, hastened to change the
subject. She snuggled up against Mrs. Walton's knee, saying, as she
looked into the glowing fire, "This is the best time of the day, when
the wind goes 'Whooo' in the chimney, and it's cold and dark outdoahs
and cheerful and bright inside. It's just the time for story-telling.
Don't you know one, Mrs. Walton?"

"Of course she does," Kitty answered for her. "And if you don't know
one, you can make one up to order. Can't you, mamsie?"

"Your poem suggested a story," answered Mrs. Walton, and with one hand
smoothing Lloyd's fair head as it rested against her knee, and the other
stroking Kitty's dark one in her lap, she began:

"Once upon a time (the same time that the Lady of Shalott wove her magic
web, and near the four gray towers from which she watched the road
running down to Camelot), there lived three weavers. Their houses stood
side by side, and such had been their equal fortunes that whatever
happened under the roof of one had always happened under the roofs of
the others. They wove the same patterns in their looms, and they
received the same number of shillings for their webs. They sang the same
songs, told the same tales, ate the same kind of broth from the same
kind of bowls, and dressed in the same coarse goods of hodden gray.

"But they were unlike as three weavers could possibly be. The first
insisted on weaving all his webs a certain length, regardless of the
size of the man who must wear the mantle. (Each web was supposed to be
just long enough to make one mantle.) The second carelessly wove his any
length that happened to be convenient, and stretched or cut it afterward
to fit whomsoever would take it. But the third, with great painstaking
and care, measured first the man and then the web by the inches and ells
of his carefully notched yardstick.

"Now to each weaver was born a daughter, all on the same day, and they
named them Hertha, Huberta, and Hildegarde. On the night after the
christening, as the three men sat smoking their pipes on the same stoop,
the father of Hertha said, 'Do not think me puffed up with unseemly
pride, good neighbours, but wonderful fortune hath befallen me and mine
this day. Clotho, the good fairy of all the weavers, was present at my
Hertha's christening, and left beside her cradle a gift: a tiny loom
that from beam to shuttle is of purest gold. And she whispered to me in
passing, "Good fortune, Herthold. It is written in the stars that a
royal prince shall seek to wed thy child."'

"But Herthold's news caused no astonishment to his neighbours. What had
happened under the roof of one had happened under the roofs of all, and
the same good fortune was written in the stars for each, and the same
gift had been left by each child's cradle. So the three friends rejoiced
together, and boasted jestingly among themselves of the three kings'
sons who should some day sit down at their tables.

"But presently Hildgardmar, the father of Hildegarde, said, 'But there
may be a slip twixt cup and lip. Mayhap our daughters cannot fulfil the
required condition.'

"At that they looked grave for a moment, for Clotho had added in
passing, 'One thing is necessary. She must weave upon this loom I leave
a royal mantle for the prince's wearing. It must be ample and fair to
look upon, rich cloth of gold, of princely size and texture. Many will
come to claim it, but if it is woven rightly the destined prince alone
can wear it, and him it will fit in all faultlessness, as the falcon's
feathers fit the falcon. But if it should not be ample and fine, meet
for royal wearing, the prince will not deign to don it, and the maiden's
heart shall break, as broke the shattered mirror of the Lady of
Shalott.'

"'Oh, well,' said Herthold, when the three had smoked in silence a
little space. 'I'll guard against that. I shall hide all knowledge of
the magic loom from my daughter until she be grown. Then, under mine
own eye, by mine own measurements that I always use, shall she weave the
goodly garment. In the meantime she shall learn all the arts which
become a princess to know--broidery and fair needlework, and songs upon
a lute. But of the weaving she shall know naught until she be grown.
That I am determined upon. 'Tis sorry work her childish hands would make
of it, if left to throw the shuttle at a maiden's fickle fancy.'

"But Hubert shook his head. 'Why stew about a trifle!' he exclaimed.
'Forsooth, on such a tiny loom no web of any kind can well be woven.
'Tis but a toy that Clotho left the child to play with, and she shall
weave her dreams and fancies on it at her own sweet will. I shall not
interfere. What's written in the stars is written, and naught that I can
do will change it. Away, friend Hildgardmar, with thy forebodings!'

"Hildgardmar said nothing in reply, but he thought much. He followed the
example of the others, and early and late might have been heard the
pounding of the three looms, for there was need to work harder than ever
now, that the little maidens might have teachers for all the arts
becoming a princess--broidery and fair needlework and songs upon the
lute.

"While the looms pounded in the dwellings the little maidens grew apace.
They played together in the same garden and learned from the same
skilled teachers their daily lessons, and in their fondness for each
other were as three sisters.

"One day Huberta said to the others, 'Come with me and I will show you a
beautiful toy that Clotho left me at my christening. My father says she
gave one to each of us, and that it is written in the stars that we are
each to wed a prince if we can weave for him an ample cloak of cloth of
gold. Already I have begun to weave mine."

"All silently, for fear of watchful eyes and forbidding voices, they
stole into an inner room, and she showed them the loom of gold. But now
no longer was it the tiny toy that had been left beside her cradle. It
had grown with her growth. For every inch that had been added to her
stature an inch had been added to the loom's. The warp was Clotho's
gift, all thread of gold, and it, too, grew with the maiden's growth;
but the thread the shuttle carried was of her own spinning--rainbow hued
and rose-coloured, from the airy dream-fleece of her own sweet fancies.

"'See,' she whispered, 'I have begun the mantle for my prince's
wearing.' Seizing the shuttle as she had seen her father do so many
times, she crossed the golden warp with the woof-thread of a rosy
day-dream. Hertha and Hildegarde looked on in silent envy, not so much
for the loom as for the mirror which hung beside it, wherein, as in the
Lady of Shalott's, moved the shadows of the world. The same pictures
that flitted across hers, flitted across Huberta's.

"'See!' she cried again, pointing to the mirror, 'That curly shepherd
lad! Does he not look like a prince as he strides by with his head high,
and his blue eyes smiling upon all the world? He carries his crook like
a royal sceptre, forsooth. Well you may believe I am always at my mirror
both at sunrise and sunset to see him pass gaily by.'

"'Yon long-haired page in crimson clad is more to my liking,' said
Hertha, timidly. 'Methinks he has a noble mien, as of one brought up in
palaces. I wonder why my father has never said aught to me of Clotho's
gift. I, too, should be at my weaving, for I am as old as thou,
Huberta.'

"'And I also,' added Hildegarde.

"'Ask him,' quoth Huberta. 'Mayhap he hath forgot.'

"So when Hertha reached home, she went to her father Herthold, and said,
timidly, with downcast eyes and blushes, 'Father--where is my loom, like
Huberta's? I, too, would be weaving as it is written in the stars.'

"But Herthold glowered upon her grimly. 'Who told thee of aught that is
written in the stars?' he demanded, so sternly that her heart quaked
within her. 'Hear me! Never again must thou listen to such idle tales.
When thou art a woman grown, thou mayst come to me, and I may talk to
thee then of webs and weaving, but what hast thou to do with such things
now? Thou! a silly child! Bah! I am ashamed that ever a daughter of mine
should think such foolishness!'

"Hertha, shamed and abashed, stole away to weep, that she had incurred
her father's scorn. But next day, when they played in the garden,
Huberta said, 'Thy father is an old tyrant to forbid thee the use of
Clotho's gift. He cannot love thee as mine does me, or he would not deny
thee such a pleasure. Come! I will help thee to find it.'

"So hand in hand they stole into an inner room by a door that Herthold
thought securely bolted, and there stood a loom like Huberta's, and over
it a mirror in which the same shadows of the world were repeated in
passing. And as Hertha picked up the shuttle to send the thread of a
rosy day-dream through the warp of gold, the long-haired page in crimson
clad passed down the street outside, and she saw his image in the
mirror.

"'How like a prince he bears himself!' she murmured. 'My father is
indeed a tyrant to deny me the pleasure of looking out upon the world
and weaving sweet fancies about it. Henceforth I shall not obey him, but
shall daily steal away in here, to weave in secret what he will not
allow me to do openly.'

"At the same time, Hildegarde stood before her father, saying, timidly,
'Is it true, my father, what Huberta says is written in the stars?
To-day when I saw Huberta's loom I pushed back the bolt which has always
barred the door leading into an inner room from mine, and there I found
the loom of gold and a wonderful mirror. I fain would use them as
Huberta does, but I have come to ask thee first, if all be well.'

"A very tender smile lighted the face of old Hildgardmar. Taking the
hand of the little Hildegarde in his, he led the way into the inner
room. 'I have often looked forward to this day, my little one,' he
exclaimed, 'although I did not think thou wouldst come quite so soon
with thy questions. It is indeed true, what Huberta hast told thee is
written in the stars. On the right weaving of this web depends the
happiness of all thy future, and not only thine but of those who may
come after thee.

"''Tis a dangerous gift the good Clotho left thee, for looking in that
mirror thou wilt be tempted to weave thy web to fit the shifting figures
that flit therein. But listen to thy father who hath never yet deceived
thee, and who has only thy good at heart. Keep always by thy side this
sterling yardstick which I give thee, for it marks the inches and the
ells to which the stature of a prince must measure. Not until the web
doth fully equal it can it be safely taken from the loom.

"'Thou art so young, 'tis but a little mantle thou couldst weave this
year, at best. Fit but to clothe the shoulders of yon curly shepherd
lad.' He pointed to the bright reflection passing in the mirror. 'But
'tis a magic loom that lengthens with thy growth, and each year shall
the web grow longer, until at last, a woman grown, thou canst hold it up
against the yardstick, and find that it doth measure to the last inch
and ell the size demanded by a prince's noble stature.

"'But thou wilt oft be dazzled by the mirror's sights, and youths will
come to thee, one by one, each begging, "Give _me_ the royal mantle,
Hildegarde. _I_ am the prince the stars have destined for thee." And
with honeyed words he'll show thee how the mantle in the loom is just
the length to fit _his_ shoulders. But let him not persuade thee to cut
it loose and give it him, as thy young fingers will be fain to do. Weave
on another year, and yet another, till thou, a woman grown, canst
measure out a perfect web, more ample than these stripling youths could
carry, but which will fit thy prince in faultlessness, as falcon's
feathers fit the falcon.'

"Hildegarde, awed by his solemn words of warning, took the silver
yardstick and hung it by the mirror, and standing before old Hildgardmar
with bowed head, said, 'You may trust me, father; I will not cut the
golden warp from out the loom until I, a woman grown, have woven such a
web as thou thyself shalt say is worthy of a prince's wearing.'

"So Hildgardmar left her with his blessing, and went back to his work.
After that the winter followed the autumn and the summer the spring many
times, and the children played in the garden and learned their lessons
of broidery and fair needlework and songs upon the lute. And every day
each stole away to the inner room, and threw the shuttle in and out
among the threads of gold.

"Hertha worked always in secret, peering ever in the mirror, lest
perchance the long-haired page in crimson clad should slip by and she
not see him. For the sheen of his fair hair dazzled her to all other
sights, and his face was all she thought of by day and dreamed of by
night, so that she often forgot to ply her needle or finger her lute. He
was only a page, but she called him prince in her thoughts until she
really believed him one. When she worked at the web she sang to herself,
'It is for him--for him!'

"Huberta laughed openly about her web, and her father often teased her
about the one for whom it was intended, saying, when the village lads
went by, 'Is _that_ thy prince?' or, 'Is it for this one thou weavest?'
But he never went with her into that inner room, so he never knew
whether the weaving was done well or ill. And he never knew that she cut
the web of one year's weaving and gave it to the curly shepherd lad. He
wore it with jaunty grace at first, and Huberta spent long hours at the
mirror, watching to see him pass by all wrapped within its folds. But it
grew tarnished after awhile from his long tramps over the dirty moors
after his flocks, and Huberta saw other figures in the mirror which
pleased her fancy, and she began another web. And that she gave to a
student in cap and gown, and the next to a troubadour strolling past her
window, and the next to a knight in armour who rode by one idle summer
day.

"The years went by, she scattering her favours to whomsoever called her
sweetheart with vows of devotion, and Hertha faithful to the page alone.
Hildegarde worked on, true to her promise. But there came a time when a
face shone across her mirror so noble and fair that she started back in
a flutter.

"'Oh, surely 'tis he,' she whispered to her father. 'His eyes are so
blue they fill all my dreams.' But old Hildgardmar answered her, 'Does
he measure up to the standard set by the sterling yardstick for a
full-grown prince to be?'

"'No,' she answered, sadly. 'Only to the measure of an ordinary man. But
see how perfectly the mantle I have woven would fit him!'

"'Nay, weave on, then,' he said, kindly. 'Thou hast not yet reached the
best thou canst do. This is not the one written for thee in the stars.'

"A long time after a knight flashed across the mirror blue. A knight
like Sir Lancelot:

    "His broad clear brow in sunlight glowed.
     On burnished hooves his war-horse trode.
     From underneath his helmet flowed,
     His coal-black curls, as on he rode
        As he rode down to Camelot."

"So noble he was that she felt sure that he was the one destined to wear
her mantle, and she went to her father, saying, 'He has asked for the
robe, and measured by thy own sterling yardstick, it would fit him in
faultlessness, as the falcon's feathers fit the falcon.'

"Hildgardmar laid the yardstick against the web. 'Nay,' he said. 'This
is only the size of a knight. It lacks a handbreadth yet of the measure
of a prince.'

"Hildegarde hesitated, half-pouting, till he said, beseechingly, 'I am
an old man, knowing far more of the world and its ways than thou, my
daughter. Have I ever deceived thee? Have I ever had aught but thy good
at heart? Have patience a little longer. Another year and thou wilt be
able to fashion a still larger web.'

"At last it came to pass, as it was written in the stars, a prince came
riding by to ask for Hertha as his bride. Old Herthold, taking her by
the hand, said, '_Now_ I will lead thee into the inner room and teach
thee how to use the fairy's sacred gift. With me for a teacher, thou
canst surely make no mistake.'

"When they came into the inner room there stood only the empty loom from
which the golden warp had been clipped.

"'How now!' he demanded, angrily. Hertha, braving his ill-humour, said,
defiantly, 'Thou art too late. Because I feared thy scorn of what thou
wast pleased to call my childish foolishness, I wove in secret, and when
my prince came by, long ago I gave it him. He stands outside at the
casement.'

"The astonished Herthold, turning in a rage, saw the long-haired page
clad in the mantle which she had woven in secret. He tore it angrily
from the youth, and demanded she should give it to the prince, who
waited to claim it, but the prince would have none of it. It was of too
small a fashion to fit his royal shoulders, and had been defiled by the
wearing of a common page. So with one look of disdain he rode away.

"Stripped of the robe her own fancy had woven around him, the page stood
shorn before her. It was as if a veil had been torn from her eyes, and
she no longer saw him as her fond dreams had painted him. She saw him in
all his unworthiness; and the cloth of gold which was her maiden-love,
and the rosy day-dreams she had woven into it to make the mantle of a
high ideal, lay in tattered shreds at her feet. When she looked from the
one to the other and saw the mistake she had made and the opportunity
she had lost, she covered her face with her hands and cried out to
Herthold, 'It is thy fault. Thou shouldst not have laughed my childish
questions to scorn, and driven me to weave in ignorance and in secret.'
But all her upbraiding was too late. As it was written in the stars, her
heart broke, as broke the shattered mirror of the Lady of Shalott.

"That same day came a prince to Hubert, asking for his daughter. He
called her from the garden, saying, gaily, 'Bring forth the mantle now,
Huberta. Surely it must be a goodly one after all these years of weaving
at thy own sweet will.'

"She brought it forth, but when he saw it he started back aghast at its
pigmy size. When he demanded the reason, she confessed with tears that
she had no more of the golden warp that was Clotho's sacred gift. She
had squandered that maiden-love in the bygone years to make the mantles
she had so thoughtlessly bestowed upon the shepherd lad and the
troubadour, the student and the knight. This was all she had left to
give.

"'Well,' said her father, at length, ''tis only what many another has
done in the wanton foolishness of youth. But perchance when the prince
sees how fair thou art, and how sweetly thou dost sing to thy lute, he
may overlook the paltriness of thy offering. Take it to him.'

"When she had laid it before him, he cast only one glance at it, so
small it was, so meagre of gold thread, so unmeet for a true prince's
wearing. Then he looked sorrowfully into the depths of her beautiful
eyes and turned away.

"The gaze burned into her very soul and revealed to her all that she had
lost for evermore. She cried out to her father with pitiful sobs that
set his heartstrings in a quiver, 'It is _thy_ fault! Why didst thou not
warn me what a precious gift was the gold warp Clotho gave me! Why didst
thou say to me, "Is _this_ the lad? Is that the lad?" till I looked only
at the village churls and wove my web to fit their unworthy shoulders,
and forgot how high is the stature of a perfect prince!' Then, hiding
her face, she fled away, and as it was written in the stars, her heart
broke, as broke the shattered mirror of the Lady of Shalott.

"Then came the prince to Hildegarde. All blushing and aflutter, she
clipped the threads that held the golden web of her maiden-love, through
which ran all her happy girlish day-dreams, and let him take it from
her. Glancing shyly up, she saw that it fitted him in all faultlessness,
as the falcon's feathers fit the falcon.

"Then old Hildgardmar, stretching out his hands, said, 'Because even in
childhood days thou ever kept in view the sterling yardstick as I bade
thee, because no single strand of all the golden warp that Clotho gave
thee was squandered on another, because thou waitedst till thy woman's
fingers wrought the best that lay within thy woman's heart, all
happiness shall now be thine! Receive it as thy perfect crown!'

"So with her father's blessing light upon her, she rode away beside the
prince; and ever after, all her life was crowned with happiness as it
had been written for her in the stars."

There was a moment's silence when Mrs. Walton ceased speaking. The fire
had died down until only a fitful glimmer lighted the thoughtful faces
of the girls grouped around her on the hearth-rug. Then Kitty said,
impulsively:

"Of course Hertha means Ida, and you want us all to be Hildegardes, but
who is Huberta?"

"Mittie Dupong, of course!" answered Allison. "And Flynn Willis and Cad
Bailey and all that set we were so disgusted with at Carter Brown's
party. Didn't you mean them, mother?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Walton, well pleased that the tale had been interpreted
so quickly. "I must confess that I told the story solely for the moral I
wanted to tack on to the end of it. You do not know how my heart has
ached for Ida. Poor misguided child! From what I have heard of her aunt
I think she must be like Hertha's father, and made Ida feel that she had
no sympathy with her childish love-affairs. Then Ida made the mistake
that Hertha did, wove her ideals in secret, and fitted them on the first
boy who pleased her fancy. Once wrapped in them she was blind to all his
faults, and could not judge him as other people did. She made a hero of
him. I blame her aunt as much as I do her, because she did not teach her
long ago, as Hildgardmar did his daughter.

"Little girls begin very early sometimes to dream about that far-away
land of Romance. The teasing questions older people ask them often set
them to thinking seriously of it. They call their little playmates their
sweethearts, and imagine the admiration and fondness they have for them
is the love that is written in the stars. Nobody explains to them that
they will outgrow their early ideals as they do their dresses.

"I can remember how my ideals used to change. When I was a little girl,
about as old as Elise, I thought that my Prince Charming would be like
the one in the story of the Sleeping Beauty. I dreamed of sitting all
day beside him on a crystal throne, with a crown on my head and a
sceptre in my hand. But as I grew older I realized how stupid that would
be, and I fashioned him after the figures that flitted across my mirror
in the world of books. He was as handsome as a Greek god, and the feats
he performed could have been possible only in the days of the Round
Table.

"Then I outgrew that ideal. Others took its place, but when a woman
grown, I held up the one that was the best my woman's heart could
fashion, I found that my prince measured just to the stature of an
honest man, simple and earnest and true. That was all--no Greek god, no
dashing knight, but a strong, manly man, whose love was my life's crown
of happiness."

She glanced up at the portrait over the mantel, and there was an
impressive pause. Lloyd broke the silence presently, speaking very fast
in an embarrassed sort of way.

"But, Mrs. Walton, don't you think there was some excuse for Ida besides
her being blinded to Mistah Bannon's faults? He made her believe she had
such a good influence ovah him that she thought it was her _duty_ to
disobey her aunt, because it was moah important that he should be
reformed than that she should be obeyed in a mattah that seemed
unreasonable to Ida."

"Yes," was the hesitating answer. "But Ida was largely influenced to
take that stand by the books she had been reading. That's another matter
I want to speak about, since my little girls have confessed to the
reading of 'Daisy Dale' and the 'Heiress of Dorn.' While there is
nothing particularly objectionable in such books in one way, in another
their influence is of the very worst. The characters are either unreal
or overdrawn, or they are so interestingly coloured that they are like
the figures of the shepherd lad and the long-haired page in the mirrors
of Hertha and Huberta. In watching them a girl is apt to weave her web
'to fit _their_ unworthy shoulders, and forget how high is the stature
of a perfect prince.' Such books are poor yardsticks, and give one false
ideas of value and measurement.

"Ned's plea is what nearly every wild young fellow makes, and nine times
out of ten it appeals to a girl more than any other argument he could
use. 'Give _me_ the mantle, Hildegarde. It will help me to live right.'
So she takes him in hand to reform him. Nothing could be purer and
higher than the motives which prompt her to sacrifice everything to what
she considers her duty. I had a schoolmate once who married a bright
young fellow because he came to her with Ned's plea. Her father said,
'Let him reform first. What he will not do for a sweetheart, he will
never do for a wife.' But she would not listen, and to-day she is living
in abject poverty and cruel unhappiness. He is rarely sober.

"In olden times a man didn't come whining to a maiden and say, 'I long
to be a knight, but I am too weak to do battle unaided. Be my ladye fair
and help me win my spurs.' No, she would have laughed him to scorn. He
won his spurs first, and only after he had proved himself worthy and
received his accolade, did she give him her hand.

"Oh, my dear girls, if you would _only_ do as Hildegarde did, ask first
if all be well before you clip the golden web from the loom and give it
to the one who begs for it! He is not the one written for you in the
stars--he does not measure to the stature of a true prince if he comes
with such a selfish demand as Ned did."

"That is a story I'll nevah forget," said Lloyd, soberly. "I think it
ought to be printed and put in the seminary library for all the othah
girls to read."

"And some of the fathers and mothers, too," added Betty. "Ida's aunt
ought to have a copy."

"No, it is too late," remarked Katie. "It's a case of what grandpa would
call 'locking the stable after the horse is stolen.'"

There was a knock at the door. "Supper is served," announced Barbry's
voice in the hall.




CHAPTER XV.

THANKSGIVING DAY


ONE might have thought, watching the pillow-fight which went on that
night at bedtime, that the fairy-tale had been told too soon. The five
girls, romping and shrieking through halls and bedrooms as the sport
went on, fast and furious, seemed too young for its grave lessons. But
"the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts," even when its actions
are most childish and careless, and the little tale made a deeper
impression than the teller of it realized.

For one thing, Betty laid aside the book she was writing, although she
had secretly cherished the hope of having the story of Gladys and Eugene
published sometime during the coming year.

"I might be ashamed of it when I am grown," she explained, quoting old
Hildgardmar: "''Tis but a little mantle thou couldst weave this year, at
best, fit but to clothe the shoulders of yon curly shepherd lad.' If I
am to outgrow my ideals as I do my dresses, I ought to wait. I want the
critics to say of me 'Thou waitedst till thy woman's fingers wrought the
best that lay within thy woman's heart.' So I'll lay the book aside for
a few years, till I've learned more about people. But I'll write it some
day."

It was that same night, while they were getting ready for bed, that the
Shadow Club was disbanded.

"I nevah want to heah that name again," exclaimed Lloyd, shaking out her
hair and beginning to brush it. "It was so disgraced by being dragged
into the newspapahs with such a lie, that it almost makes me ill
whenevah I think of it."

"Oh, you don't want to give up the work for the mountain people, do
you?" asked Allison, in dismay.

"No, but I'd like to stop until aftah the holidays. We have so much to
do getting ready for Christmas. Besides, I'd like to be able to tell the
girls that there wasn't such a club any moah. The next term we could
make a fresh start with a new name, just the five of us."

"Oh, let's call it 'The Order of Hildegarde!'" cried Betty,
enthusiastically. "And all the time we are doing 'broidery and fair
needlework' to sell for the mountain people, we can be trying to weave
our ideals as Hildegarde did, so that we may not miss the happiness that
is written for us in the stars."

"I'd like that," exclaimed Allison, entering into the new plan eagerly.
"We could have club colours this time, gold and rose, the colour of the
warp and woof, you know."

"Yes, yes! That's it!" assented Kitty, with equal enthusiasm. "Streamers
of narrow gold and rose ribbon, pinned by a tiny gilt star, to remind us
of what is written in the stars. Don't you think that would be lovely,
Katie?"

"Yes," answered Katie, "but I think if we want to keep the order a
secret we oughtn't to wear such a badge in public. It would be safer to
keep them in our 'inner rooms.' But we could use them in all sorts of
ways, the ribbons crossed on our pincushions, or streamers of them to
tie back our curtains, or broad bands on our work-baskets and
embroidery-bags."

Lloyd gave ready assent. "That would suit me, for my room at home is
already furnished in rose colah. All I would have to do is to add the
gold and the sta'hs."

"And mine is a white and gold room," said Betty. "I'll only have to give
it a few touches of rose colour."

A few more words settled the matter, as the girls hovered around the
fire in their night-dresses, and then the establishment of the new Order
of Hildegarde was celebrated by a pillow fight, the like of which for
noise and vigour had never before been known at The Beeches.

In the hard work that followed after their return to school, time
slipped by so fast that Thanksgiving Day came surprisingly soon. Nearly
all the pupils and teachers went home for the short vacation, or visited
friends in Louisville. Even the president and his wife went away. Only
six girls besides Lloyd and Betty were left to follow the matron to
church on Thanksgiving morning.

It was a lonesome walk. A Sabbath-like stillness pervaded the quiet
Valley, and the ringing of the bell in the ivy-grown belfry of the
little stone church, and the closed doors at the post-office, gave the
girls the feeling that Sunday had somehow come in the middle of the
week. As they crossed the road toward the iron gate leading into the
churchyard, Lloyd looked up past the manse toward The Beeches, hoping
for a glimpse of the Walton girls. Then she remembered that Allison had
told her that they were all going to town to celebrate the day with her
Aunt Elise, and the feeling of being left out of everybody's good times
began to weigh heavily upon her.

No smoke was coming out of any of the chimneys, either at The Beeches or
Edgewood. When she thought of Locust, also cold and empty, with no fire
on its hospitable hearths, no feast on its ample table, no cheer
anywhere within its walls, and her family far away, a wave of
homesickness swept over her that brought a mist over her eyes. She could
scarcely see as they went up the steps.

Mrs. Bond, with her usual dread of being late, had hurried them away
from the seminary much too soon. Not more than half a dozen carriages
had driven into the grove around the little country church when they
reached the door, and only a few people were waiting inside. As Lloyd
sat in the solemn silence that was broken only now and then by a stifled
cough or the rustle of a turning leaf, she had hard work to battle back
the tears. But with a sudden determination to overcome such a feeling,
she sat up very straight in the end of the pew, and pressed her lips
together hard.

"It's almost wicked of me," she thought, "to feel so bad about the one
thing I can't have when there are a thousand other things that ought to
make me happy. It's only a pah't of my bo'ding-school experiences, and
will be ovah in a little while. I don't suppose anybody in church has
moah to be thankful for than I have."

She glanced furtively across the aisle. "I'm thankful that I'm not that
old Mistah Saxon with his wooden leg, or that poah little Mrs. Crisp in
the cawnah, with five children to suppo't, and one of them a baby that
has fits."

Her gaze wandered down the opposite aisle. "And I'm suah it's something
to be thankful for not to have a nose like Libbie Simms, or such a fussy
old fathah as Sue Bell Wade has to put up with. And I'm glad I haven't
such poah taste as to make a rainbow out of myself, wearing so many
different colahs at once as Miss McGill does. Five different shades of
red on the same hat are enough to set one's teeth on edge. I believe I
could go on all day, counting the things I'm glad I haven't got; and as
for the things I have--" She began checking them off on her finger-tips.
There was a handful before she had fairly begun to count; home, family,
perfect health, the love of many friends, the opportunities that filled
every day to the brim.

The organist pulled out the stops and began playing an old familiar
chant as a voluntary. As the full, sweet chords filled the church Lloyd
could almost hear the words rising with the music:

        "My cup runneth over.
    Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
         All the days of my life."

As the music swelled louder, her counting was interrupted by the opening
of the door and the entrance of several generations of the Moore family,
who had come back to Oaklea for a Thanksgiving reunion. It seemed good
to Lloyd to see the old judge's white head gleaming like silver in its
accustomed pew. His benign face fairly radiated cheerfulness and
good-will as he took his place once more among his old neighbours.

Rob walked just behind him, so tall and erect, it seemed to Lloyd that
he must have grown several inches in the three short months since they
had cut the last notches in the measuring-tree. As he turned to throw
his overcoat across the back of the seat, his quick glance spied Lloyd
and Betty several pews in the rear, and he flashed them a smile of
greeting. At the same time, so quickly and deftly that Mrs. Bond did not
see the motion, he held up a package that he had carried in under his
overcoat, and instantly dropped it out of sight again on the seat. Then
he straightened himself up beside his grandfather, as if he were a model
of decorum.

[Illustration: "'IT'S LIKE A BIT OF HOME TO SEE YOU AGAIN.'"]

Lloyd and Betty exchanged a meaning glance which seemed to say, "That
five-pound box of Huyler's best he promised us;" and Lloyd found herself
wondering several times during the long service how he would manage to
present it. That problem did not worry Rob, however. As the congregation
slowly moved down the aisles and out into the vestibule, he elbowed his
way to Mrs. Bond, standing beside her eight charges like a motherly old
hen.

"Good morning, Mrs. Bond," he exclaimed, in his straightforward, boyish
way. "You're going to take me under your wing and let me walk to the
gate with Betty and Lloyd, aren't you! I'll be as good as grandfather if
you will, and I'll even take him along if it's necessary to have anybody
to vouch for me."

His mischievous smile was so irresistible that she gave him a motherly
pat on the shoulder. "Run along," she exclaimed, laughingly. "I'll
follow presently. There are several people I want to speak to first."

"Oh, Rob," exclaimed Lloyd, as he started down the avenue beside her
and Betty. "It's like a bit of home to see you again. Talk fast and tell
us everything. Do you think you'll pass in Latin? Is it decided whethah
you're to go East to school aftah Christmas? Did you see that awful
piece in the papah about our club?"

She poured out her questions so rapidly that they were half-way to the
seminary before he could answer all her catechism, and then he had so
many to ask her that she almost forgot to tell him about the box they
had received from Locust that morning.

"A suah enough Thanksgiving-box!" she exclaimed gleefully. "Just as if
we'd really been away off from home at school, with all the good things
that Mom Beck could think of or Aunt Cindy could cook, from a turkey to
a monstrous big fruit-cake. Mothah planned the surprise before she went
away. Think of the gay midnight suppahs we could have if we hadn't
turned ovah a new leaf and refawmed."

"So you've reformed!" he repeated. "Then boarding-school life can't seem
as funny to you as you thought last September it was going to be."

"Yes, it does," protested Betty. "I'll be glad when the next four weeks
are over so that we can go back to Locust, but excepting only two or
three things that happened, I've enjoyed every minute that we've been
at the seminary. I'll always be glad that we had this experience."

"And it wasn't at all like you said it would be," added Lloyd,
laughingly, "'scorched oatmeal and dried apples and old cats watching at
every keyhole.' There was some eavesdropping, but it wasn't the teachahs
who did it, and we had moah fun getting even with the girl who did than
I could tell in a week. I'll tell you about our playing ghost, and all
the rest, when you come out Christmas."

"Then I'll have to hand over the candy," he said. "You've earned it, if
you've stood the strain this long and kept as hale and hearty as you
look."

They had reached the high green picket gate by this time, and,
delivering the box to the girls, with a few more words he left them.
Dinner was to be early at Oaklea, he said, as they were all going home
on the five o'clock train.

"Oh, it was just like having a piece of home to see him again,"
exclaimed Lloyd, looking after him wistfully as he lifted his cap and
walked rapidly away. "I can hardly wait to get back now. Wouldn't you
like to walk up to Locust aftah dinnah, Betty?"

"No, I believe not," was the hesitating reply. "It would make me feel
more homesick than if I stayed away altogether. Mom Beck will be off
keeping holiday somewhere, and everything will be shut up and
desolate-looking. Probably all we'd see would be Lad and Tarbaby out in
the pasture. Let's walk over to Rollington instead, after dinner, and
take a lot of things to that poor little Mrs. Crisp out of our box from
home."

"How funny for you to think of the same thing that I did this mawning in
church!" exclaimed Lloyd. "The text made me think of it, and when I
looked across at her in that pitiful old wispy crape veil, and thought
of the washing she has to do, and the baby with the fits, I was so
thankful that I was not in her place that I felt as if I ought to give
her every penny I possess."

It was a very quiet day. A better dinner than usual, and the long walk
over to Rollington late in the afternoon was all that made it differ
from the Sundays that they had spent at the seminary. But as the two
little Good Samaritans trudged homeward over the frozen pike, swinging
their empty basket between them, Lloyd exclaimed, "I've had a good time
to-day, aftah all, and I would have been perfectly misah'ble if I'd gone
on the way I stah'ted out to do--thinking about the one thing I wanted
and couldn't have. I just _made_ myself stop, and go to thinking of the
things I did have, and then I forgot to feel homesick. Counting yoah
blessings and carrying turkey to poah folks doesn't sound like a very
exciting way to spend yoah holidays, but it makes you feel mighty good
inside, doesn't it! Especially when you think how pleased Mrs. Crisp
was."

"Yes," answered Betty. "I don't know how to express the way the day has
made me feel. Not happy, exactly, for when I'm that way I always want to
sing." She held her muff against her cold face. "It's more like a big,
soft, furry kind of contentment. If I were a cat I'd be purring."




CHAPTER XVI.

CHRISTMAS GREENS AND WATCH-NIGHT EMBERS


THERE is a chapter in Betty's Good Times book which tells all about that
last day at the seminary, before the Christmas vacation; of the hurried
packing and leave-taking; of her trip to town with Lloyd to meet Papa
Jack and come out home with him on the five o'clock train, laden with
Christmas packages like all the other suburban passengers; of the
carriage waiting for them at the depot, just as if they had been away at
some school a long distance from the Valley, and then the crowning joy
of seeing her godmother on the platform, waving her handkerchief as the
train stopped in front of the depot.

They had not expected her back from Hot Springs until the next day, and
all the way out on the train had been discussing the reception they
intended to give her. There had been a twinkle in Mr. Sherman's eyes as
he listened, for he knew of this surprise in store for them, and had had
a hand in planning it.

It is all in Betty's Good Times book, even to the way they rolled down
the steps and fell over each other in their haste to reach her, and the
welcome that made it seem more than ever as if they were coming home
from a long journey to spend their Christmas vacation, just as thousands
of other schoolgirls were doing all over the country. Then the drive
homeward in the frosty, starlit dusk to find Locust all a-twinkle, a
light in every window and a fire on every hearth; the great front door
swinging wide on its hospitable hinges to send a stream of light down
the avenue to meet them, and the spirit of Christmas cheer and
expectancy falling warm upon them as they crossed the threshold.

The memory of it would be something to be glad for always, Betty
thought, as she danced into the long drawing-room after Lloyd, and saw
the old Colonel start up from his chair before the fire and come forward
to meet them, the candle-light falling softly on his silver hair and
smiling face.

Although Betty had laid aside her unfinished romance of Gladys and
Eugene, she could no more help writing than a fish can keep from
swimming, and that is why her Good Times book held so many interesting
pages. All the energy and time that would have been put into the silly
little novel went instead to the description of real scenes and real
people, which in after years made the little white books the most
precious volumes in all her library. As fast as one was filled she began
another. The one now on her desk had the number IV. stamped in gold on
the white kid cover, under her initials.

There were few pages in this fourth volume more interesting than the
ones she found time to write on Christmas Eve. She had gone with Lloyd
and Allison and Kitty that afternoon in search for Christmas greens with
which to decorate the house.

Malcolm and Keith Maclntyre, Rob Moore, and Ranald Walton had met them
in Tanglewood, their guns over their shoulders, and had joined them in
their quest. The mistletoe they wanted grew too high to be climbed for
or to be dislodged by throwing at, but Ranald, an expert marksman,
volunteered to shoot down all they could carry. He was just home from
military school on his vacation, and Rob Moore had been out for two days
hunting with him. Malcolm and Keith had been at their grandmother's
several days, tramping long distances over the frosty fields, and coming
in well satisfied each evening with the contents of their game-bags.

Malcolm and Rob were to leave for the same college-preparatory school
after the holidays, and as they were going back to town on the five
o'clock train they had but a short time left to spend in the Valley. So
the party, after some discussion, divided into three groups, agreeing to
meet at the depot.

Ranald strode away across the woods as fast as his long legs would carry
him to the trees where the mistletoe hung. Kitty and Katie kept close in
his wake, swinging the baskets between them that he was to fill. Keith
and Betty hurried on to the place where the bittersweet grew thickest,
while Rob and Allison, Malcolm and Lloyd strolled along, filling their
baskets from the occasional trees of hemlock, spruce, and cedar they
found on their way among the bare oaks and beeches. Now and then they
found a pine with the brown cones clinging to the spicy boughs.

Only Betty's part of that quest is in the little white record; how they
ran along through Tanglewood that afternoon, she and Keith, in the late
December sunshine, breathing in the woodsy odour of the fallen leaves
and the crisp frostiness of the air, until the blood tingled in their
finger-tips and their cheeks grew red as rosy apples.

It was a pretty picture she left on the page, of the winter woods, of
the old stile leading into the adjoining churchyard, where in almost a
thicket of bare dogwood-trees and lilac-bushes stood the little
Episcopal church, built like the one next the manse, of picturesque gray
stone. The walls were aglow with the brilliant red and orange berries of
the bittersweet, which hung even from the eaves and cornices, and from
every place where the graceful vines could trail and twist and clamber.

Lloyd kept no record of that afternoon, but she never forgot it. She
walked along, her eyes shining like stars, her cheeks glowing. Her dark
blue cap and jacket made her hair seem all the fairer by contrast, and
there was a glint of gold in it, wherever the sun touched it through the
trees.

Rob and Malcolm were full of their plans for the coming term, and talked
of little else all the way through the woods, but as they reached the
stile, over which Keith and Betty had passed some time before, Rob
exclaimed:

"I forgot to tell you, Lloyd! When we were out hunting yesterday we
stopped at a cabin ever so far from here, to rest and warm. And what do
you suppose we saw on the pendulum of an old clock, swinging away on the
mantel as big as life? _Your picture!_ The one of the Princess, you
know, with the dove. I couldn't believe my eyes at first. The old man
told us it had been given to his daughter, and when he found out who
Ranald was he sent a message to Mrs. Walton about her. She's in a
hospital and will soon be well enough to come home. Mrs. Walton told us
all about it last night, how the girl imagined every time the clock
ticked that you were saying, 'For love will find the way.' It made quite
a pretty story, but you can't imagine how queer it was to stumble across
your picture in such an out-of-the-way place, and fixed up in such odd
shape, on a pendulum, of all things!"

[Illustration: "MALCOLM, LEANING ON HIS GUN, STOOD WATCHING HER."]

"It helped Corono ever so much, mother said," remarked Allison. "That's
one good thing our Shadow Club led to, if nothing else." She climbed up
on the stile and stood looking over, exclaiming at the beauty of the old
gray walls, draped in the masses of brilliant bittersweet; then,
springing down, ran across the churchyard to join Betty and Keith on the
other side and make her own selection of vines.

Rob leaned his gun against the fence and took out his watch. "Only half
an hour longer," he announced. Then, opening the back of his watch-case,
he held it out toward Lloyd.

"Do you remember that?" he asked, nodding toward a little four-leaf
clover which lay flat and green inside. "Your good-luck charm worked
wonders, Lloyd. It helped me through my Latin in such fine shape that I
intend to carry it through college with me all the way. It's like the
picture on the pendulum, isn't it? only this says, 'For _luck_ will find
the way.'"

As Lloyd began some laughing reply about his being superstitious,
Betty's voice called from the vestry door, "Oh, Rob! Come around here a
minute, please! Here's the loveliest bunch of berries you ever saw, and
it's too high for any one but you to reach!"

With one leap Rob was over the stile hurrying to Betty's assistance.
Lloyd had filled both pockets of her jacket with hickory-nuts on her way
through Tanglewood, and, seating herself on the top step of the stile,
she began cracking them with a round stone which she had picked up near
the fence. Malcolm, leaning on his gun, stood watching her.

"You never gave _me_ any four-leaf clover, Lloyd," he said, in a low
tone, as Rob strode away.

"You nevah happened to be around when I found any," answered Lloyd,
carelessly. "Have a nut instead." She nodded toward the pile on the step
beside her.

Malcolm flushed a trifle. He was nearly sixteen, tall and
broad-shouldered, but the colour came as easily to his handsome face
now as when a little fellow of ten he had begged her to keep his silver
arrow "to remember him by."

"No, thanks," he answered, stiffly. There was a jealous note in his
voice as he added, "And you wouldn't let me keep the little heart of
gold that night after the play."

"Of co'se not! Papa Jack gave me that. I think everything of it."

"You wouldn't even lend it to me," he continued.

"Because we'd come to the end of the play. You were not Sir Feal any
longah, and you didn't have any shield to bind it on, so what good would
it have done?"

"But we haven't come to the end of the play," he insisted. "I've thought
of you ever since as my Princess Winsome, and it has been more than a
year since that night. Yesterday, when I saw your picture on the
pendulum, and heard how it had influenced that girl in the cabin, I
wished that I could make you understand how much more your influence
means to me; and I made up my mind to ask you for something. Will you
give it to me, Lloyd? It's just the tip of that little curl behind your
ear. It shines like gold, and I want to put it in the back of my watch
as a talisman, like they used to carry in old times, you know--a token
that I am your knight, and that I may do as it says in the song, come
back to you 'on some glad morrow.' I want to carry it with me always, as
I shall always carry your shadow-self wherever I go."

Lloyd bent her head so far over the nuts as she chose one with great
deliberation that her hair fell across the cheek nearest him, and he
could not see how red her face grew. How handsome he was, she thought.
How deep and clear his eyes looked as they smiled into hers. If she had
never known of Ida's mistake--if she had never heard the Hildegarde
story--there might have crept into her girlish fancy, young though she
was, the thought that this was the love written for her in the stars.
But like a flash came the recollection of old Hildgardmar's warning:

"_And many youths will come to thee, each begging, 'Give me the royal
mantle, Hildegarde. I am the prince the stars have destined for thee!'_"

And then his words of blessing:

"_Because even in childhood days thou ever kept in view the sterling
yardstick as I bade thee, because no single strand of all the golden
warp that Clotho gave thee was squandered on another, because thou
waitedst till thy woman's fingers wrought the best that lay within thy
woman's heart, all happiness shall now be thine._"

"Please, Lloyd," he asked again, in a low, earnest tone.

"I--I can't, Malcolm," she stammered, giving the nut she had chosen a
sudden blow that completely smashed it.

"Why not? You gave Rob the clover to carry in _his_ watch."

"That was different. Rob doesn't care for the clovah on my account. He
carries it for the good luck it brings; not because I gave it to him."

"But he'll get to caring after awhile," said Malcolm, moodily. "He
couldn't help it. Nobody could who knew you, and I don't want him to."
Then, after a long pause in which Lloyd attended so strictly to her
nut-cracking that she did not even glance in his direction, he asked,
jealously: "Would you give _him_ the curl if he asked for it?"

Something in his tone made Lloyd look up with a provoking little smile.
"No," she answered, "not even the snippiest little snip of a hair, if he
asked for it the way you are doing, and wanted it to mean what you
do--that he was my--my chosen knight, you know."

"Is there _anybody_ you would give it to, Lloyd?"

His persistence only made her shake her head the more obstinately. It
did not take much teasing to arouse what Mom Beck called "the Lloyd
stubbo'ness."

"No! I tell you! And if you keep on talking that way I'm going home!"

"Why won't you let me talk that way? This is the last time I'll see you
until next summer, and I'm dreadfully in earnest, Lloyd. You don't know
how much it means to me. Don't you care for me at all?"

A dozen things came crowding up to her lips in answer. She wanted to
tell him the story of Hildegarde's weaving and old Hildgardmar's
warning. She wanted to say that she could not trifle with the happiness
that was written for her in the stars by giving away even a strand of
Clotho's golden thread before she was old enough to choose wisely the
one on whom to bestow such a favour. But she knew that he would not
understand these allusions to a story of which he had never heard.

She did not know how to put into words the vague, undefined feeling that
she had, that he must not come to her with such speeches until he had
won his spurs and received his accolade. It was her helplessness to
answer as she wished that made her spring up impatiently and say in her
most imperious, Little Colonel-like way, "Didn't you heah me tell you to
stop talking that way, Malcolm Maclntyre? Of co'se I care for you. I've
always liked you, and I think you're one of the nicest boys I know, but
I won't if you keep on that way when I tell you to stop. You might at
least wait till you come back from college and let me see what sawt of a
man you've turned out to be!"

"I'll be whatever you want me to be, Lloyd," he began, but just then the
mistletoe gatherers came running down the path toward them, and Ranald's
whistle brought the others from the churchyard with their bittersweet.
Lloyd flung away her nut-shells, and standing on the top of the stile
brushed her dress with her handkerchief. Malcolm, swinging his gun to
his shoulder, picked up her basket and walked beside her in conscious
silence, as the merry party strolled on toward the depot.

Several times she glanced up shyly at him, saying to herself again that
he was certainly one of the nicest boys she knew, the most courteous,
the most attractive, with the same beauty of face and polish of manner
that had made him such a winning little Knight of Kentucky. But the
little pin he had worn as the badge of that knighthood, that stood for
the "wearing the white flower of a blameless life," was no longer on the
lapel of his coat. He had laid it aside more than a year ago, saying
that he had outgrown that child's play, and that it was impossible for a
fellow of his age to live up to it.

As Lloyd noticed its absence she was glad that she had answered him as
she did. But almost with the same breath came the recollection that he
had said, "I'll be whatever you want me to be, Lloyd," and she wondered
with a quicker heart-throb if it were really so that she had power to
wield such an influence over him, and she wondered also, if she had
given him the curl as he asked, and told him that she wanted him to wear
the white flower again and live up to its meaning, if he would have done
it for her sake.

Keith rushed on ahead to see if the man had brought their suit-cases
down to the waiting-room, and the others crossed over to the store for
some hot pop-corn. There were several holly wreaths hanging in the
window, and although Lloyd knew that a number of them had already been
sent out to Locust from town, she could not resist the temptation of
buying the largest one there, it was so unusually bright and full of
berries. They had barely reached the waiting-room again when the train
came thundering along the track.

With hasty good-byes the three boys hurried up the steps. Keith and Rob
hung on to the railing on the platform of the rear car, swinging their
caps and calling back various messages about Christmas and next week and
after the holidays, but Malcolm, after one long look into the Little
Colonel's eyes, turned and went into the car. He wanted to carry away
with him undisturbed the picture she made as she stood there on the
platform, waving her handkerchief. She was all in dark blue, her fair
hair blowing in the wind, her cheeks a delicate wild rose pink. At her
feet was the basket of Christmas greens, and on her arm hung the glowing
wreath of Christmas holly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the last night of the old year. Watch-night, Mom Beck called it,
and as soon as dinner was over she and Aunt Cindy and Alec hurried away
to Brier Creek Church, where the coloured people were to hold services
till midnight, watching the old year out and the new year in.

It had been a busy week for Lloyd and Betty. The happiest of Christmas
Days had been followed by neighbourhood parties, entertainments, and
merrymakings of all descriptions. The old Southern mansion rang with
many gay young voices, and overflowed with life, for there were guests
within its hospitable gates from morning until night.

But now a lull had come in the festivities. The last guest had departed
on the evening train, and ten o'clock found the house strangely still.
The servants were all out. Betty, locked in her room, busy with
embroidery silks, was finishing a little New Year's gift with which to
surprise her godmother on the morrow. Mrs. Sherman had gone up-stairs to
sit with the old Colonel awhile. She had not been able to give him much
of her time since their return to Locust, and to-night, with the waning
year, he seemed to want her to himself to talk to him of his "long, long
ago," and listen to his tales of old days which grew dearer with each
passing holiday season.

Only Lloyd and her father were left in the long drawing-room. She had
begged to be allowed to keep Watch-night with him.

"It's only two houahs moah, mothah," she said, beseechingly. "I'll sleep
late in the mawning to make up for it. I've scarcely seen Papa Jack
since we came home, and he's going away so soon again. Besides, I nevah
did sit up to watch a new yeah come in."

So she had her way, and, sitting on a low stool at his feet, with his
hand softly stroking her hair, they talked of many things.

He began in a teasing, playful way, "You haven't told me what you
learned at boarding-school, Little Colonel. You must have absorbed a
vast amount of knowledge, when even your nights were passed in such a
learned institution."

The face she turned toward him was a very serious one, for the time had
come for confession. Yet after all confession did not seem as hard as
she had thought it would be. The very touch of his hand on her hair made
it easier, it was so kind and sympathetic. She had always gone to him
with all her childish troubles as freely as she had to her mother.
Presently she had poured out the whole story, her part in the
clandestine correspondence, Edwardo's coming to Locust, her struggle in
that very room to be loyal to the family honour and her father's trust
in her.

Allison's Christmas present to her had been an autograph copy of the
story of "The Three Weavers." It was bound in water-colour paper, tied
in the rose and gold ribbons of the Order, and bore on the cover a
design of Allison's own painting, a filmy spider-web held by a row of
golden stars. Lloyd showed it to him as she told of the forming of the
Order of Hildegarde to take the place of the old Shadow Club, and then,
spreading the book open across his knee, read it aloud--the little tale
which was destined to play such an important part in her life, and which
already had influenced her far more than she was aware.

When she had finished she sat idly turning the leaves and gazing into
the fire. "You see," she said, presently, "this is a story for fathahs
and mothahs, too, and--and--I want you to give me my yah'dstick, Papa
Jack."

As she glanced up at him with a roguish smile dimpling her face, she was
astonished to see tears in his eyes. He had been very silent while she
read the story.

"My precious little Hildegarde!" he exclaimed, drawing her to his knee
and folding his arms around her. She laid her head on his shoulder, and
he began: "I don't suppose you can understand how I feel about it,
Lloyd. It breaks me all up to think that my Little Colonel is near
enough grown to come to me with such a request. If I could have my way I
would be selfish enough to want to keep you a little girl always. I
hate to think that a time can ever come when any one may ask to take you
from me. But, Lloyd darling, it takes all the sting out of that thought
to know that you are willing to come to me so freely with your
questions--to know that there is such perfect confidence between us that
you do not feel the embarrassment that most girls feel in talking with
their fathers on such a subject. Let me think a moment, for I want to
answer as wisely as old Hildgardmar did, if that be possible."

It was a long time before he spoke again. Then he said, slowly, "There
are only three notches on the yardstick which I am going to give you,
Lloyd. The prince who comes asking for you must have, first, a clean
life. There must be no wild oats sowed through its past for my little
girl to help reap, for no man ever gathers such a harvest alone. Next,
he must be honourable in every way which that good old word implies. The
man who is that will not ask anything clandestine, nor will he ask to
take you from a comfortable home before he is able to provide one for
you himself. Then, if he would measure up to the third notch, he must be
strong. Strong in character, in purpose, and endeavour. There are many
things that I might ask for my only child, many things that I would
gladly choose for her if the choice were left to me: family, position,
wealth--but they are nothing when weighed in the balance with the love
of an honest man. If his life be clean and honourable and strong, then
choose as you will, my blessing shall go with you!"

Instantly there flashed into Lloyd's thoughts the recollection of a
boyish figure standing beside the old stile, and she wondered how far he
would measure up to that standard. Clean in life and habit? He had
always seemed so, but a little doubt disturbed her as she thought of the
white flower he no longer wore, and what he had said about it. Strong in
purpose and in effort? It was too soon to tell. He was only a boy with
all his uncertain future before him, with all the temptations of his
college days still unmet and unconquered.

As she felt her father's protecting arm around her, she nestled closer
in that safe, sure shelter, and sat considering what he had said. Once
she glanced up at the portrait over the mantel, and met the gaze of the
beautiful eyes of the young girl beside the harp--Amanthis, who had made
no mistake in her choosing, whose girlish romance had bloomed as sweetly
as the June roses that she wore.

Presently Lloyd's arm stole up around her father's neck, and she softly
repeated the words of Hildegarde's promise:

"'_You may trust me, fathah. I will not cut the golden warp from out the
loom until I, a woman grown, have woven such a web as thou thyself shalt
say is worthy of a prince's wearing!_'"

"Dear child," he answered, huskily, "you have crowned not only this year
for me, but all the years, with that promise. God grant that you may
find all happiness written for you in His stars!"

The candles were burning low in their silver sconces now. The fire on
the hearth was only a mass of glowing embers, and as the clock ticked on
toward midnight, they sat in happy silence, awaiting the dawn of the
untried new year.


THE END.




BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

THE LITTLE COLONEL BOOKS

(Trade Mark)

_By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON_

  Each 1 vol., large 12mo, cloth decorative, per vol.          $1.50

    =The Little Colonel Stories.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated.

Being three "Little Colonel" stories in the Cosy Corner Series, "The
Little Colonel," "Two Little Knights of Kentucky," and "The Giant
Scissors," put into a single volume.

    =The Little Colonel's House Party.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by Louis Meynell.


    =The Little Colonel's Holidays.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by L. J. Bridgman.


    =The Little Colonel's Hero.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by E. B. Barry.


    =The Little Colonel at Boarding School.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by E. B. Barry.


    =The Little Colonel in Arizona.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by E. B. Barry.


    =The Little Colonel's Christmas Vacation.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by E. B. Barry.


    =The Little Colonel, Maid of Honour.=
               (Trade Mark)
      Illustrated by E. B. Barry.


    =The Little Colonel.=
               (Trade Mark)


    =Two Little Knights of Kentucky.=


    =The Giant Scissors.=


    =Big Brother.=


Special Holiday Editions

  Each one volume, cloth decorative, small quarto,             $1.25

New plates, handsomely illustrated, with eight full-page drawings in
color.

      "The books are as satisfactory to the small girls, who
      find them adorable, as for the mothers and librarians,
      who delight in their influence."--_Christian
      Register._

  These four volumes, boxed as a four-volume set               $5.00


  =In the Desert of Waiting:= THE LEGEND OF CAMELBACK
      MOUNTAIN.


  =The Three Weavers:= A FAIRY TALE FOR FATHERS AND
      MOTHERS AS WELL AS FOR THEIR DAUGHTERS.


  =Keeping Tryst.=


  =The Legend of the Bleeding Heart.=

  Each one volume, tall 16mo, cloth decorative                 $0.50
  Paper boards                                                   .35

There has been a constant demand for publication in separate form of
these four stories, which were originally included in four of the
"Little Colonel" books.


  =Joel: A Boy of Galilee.= By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON.
      Illustrated by L. J. Bridgman.

  New illustrated edition, uniform with the Little Colonel
       Books, 1 vol., large 12mo, cloth decorative             $1.50

A story of the time of Christ, which is one of the author's best-known
books.


  =Asa Holmes;= OR, AT THE CROSS-ROADS. A sketch of
      Country Life and Country Humor. By ANNIE FELLOWS
      JOHNSTON. With a frontispiece by Ernest Fosbery.

  Large 16mo, cloth, gilt top                                  $1.00

      "'Asa Holmes; or, At the Cross-Roads' is the most
      delightful, most sympathetic and wholesome book that
      has been published in a long while."--_Boston Times._


  =The Rival Campers;= OR, THE ADVENTURES OF HENRY
      BURNS. By RUEL PERLEY SMITH.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                   $1.50

Here is a book which will grip and enthuse every boy reader. It is the
story of a party of typical American lads, courageous, alert, and
athletic, who spend a summer camping on an island off the Maine coast.

      "The best boys' book since 'Tom Sawyer.'"--_San
      Francisco Examiner._


  =The Rival Campers Afloat;= OR, THE PRIZE YACHT
      VIKING. By RUEL PERLEY SMITH.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                   $1.50

This book is a continuation of the adventures of "The Rival Campers" on
their prize yacht _Viking_. An accidental collision results in a series
of exciting adventures, culminating in a mysterious chase, the loss of
their prize yacht, and its recapture by means of their old yacht,
_Surprise_.


  =The Rival Campers Ashore.= by RUEL PERLEY SMITH,
      author of "The Rival Campers," "The Rival Campers
      Afloat," etc.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                   $1.50

"The Rival Campers Ashore" deals with the adventures of the campers and
their friends in and around the town of Benton. Mr. Smith introduces a
new character,--a girl,--who shows them the way to an old mill, around
which the mystery of the story revolves. The girl is an admirable
acquisition, proving as daring and resourceful as the campers
themselves.


  =The Young Section-Hand;= OR, THE ADVENTURES OF ALLAN
      WEST. By BURTON E. STEVENSON, author of "The Marathon
      Mystery," etc.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated by L. J. Bridgman $1.50

Mr. Stevenson's hero is a manly lad of sixteen, who is given a chance as
a section-hand on a big Western railroad, and whose experiences are as
real as they are thrilling.


  =The Young Train Dispatcher.= By BURTON E. STEVENSON,
      author of "The Young Section-hand," etc.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                   $1.50

The young hero has many chances to prove his manliness and courage in
the exciting adventures which befall him in the discharge of his duty.


  =Captain Jack Lorimer.= By WINN STANDISH.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated by A. B. Shute    $1.50

Jack is a fine example of the all-around American high-school boy. He
has the sturdy qualities boys admire, and his fondness for clean, honest
sport of all kinds will strike a chord of sympathy among athletic
youths.


  =Jack Lorimer's Champions;= OR, SPORTS ON LAND AND
      LAKE. By WINN STANDISH, author of "Captain Jack
      Lorimer," etc.

  Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                   $1.50

All boys and girls who take an interest in school athletics will wish to
read of the exploits of the Millvale High School students, under the
leadership of Captain Jack Lorimer.

Captain Jack's Champions play quite as good ball as do some of the teams
on the large leagues, and they put all opponents to good hard work in
other summer sports.

Jack Lorimer and his friends stand out as the finest examples of
all-round American high school boys and girls.


  =Beautiful Joe's Paradise;= OR, THE ISLAND OF
      BROTHERLY LOVE. A sequel to "Beautiful Joe." By
      MARSHALL SAUNDERS, author of "Beautiful Joe."

  One vol., library 12mo, cloth, illustrated                   $1.50

      "This book revives the spirit of 'Beautiful Joe'
      capitally. It is fairly riotous with fun, and as a
      whole is about as unusual as anything in the animal
      book line that has seen the light. It is a book for
      juveniles--old and young."--_Philadelphia Item._


  ='Tilda Jane.= By MARSHALL SAUNDERS.

  One vol., 12mo, fully illustrated, cloth decorative          $1.50

      "It is one of those exquisitely simple and truthful
      books that win and charm the reader, and I did not put
      it down until I had finished it--honest! And I am sure
      that every one, young or old, who reads will be proud
      and happy to make the acquaintance of the delicious
      waif.

      "I cannot think of any better book for children than
      this. I commend it unreservedly."--_Cyrus Townsend
      Brady._


  =The Story of the Graveleys.= By MARSHALL SAUNDERS,
      author of "Beautiful Joe's Paradise," "'Tilda Jane,"
      etc.

  Library 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated by E. B. Barry   $1.50

Here we have the haps and mishaps, the trials and triumphs, of a
delightful New England family, of whose devotion and sturdiness it will
do the reader good to hear.


  =Born to the Blue.= By FLORENCE KIMBALL RUSSEL.

  12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                          $1.25

The atmosphere of army life on the plains breathes on every page of this
delightful tale. The boy is the son of a captain of U. S. cavalry
stationed at a frontier post in the days when our regulars earned the
gratitude of a nation.


  =In West Point Gray.= By FLORENCE KIMBALL RUSSEL.

  12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated                          $1.25

West Point forms the background for the second volume in this series,
and gives us the adventures of Jack as a cadet. Here the training of his
childhood days in the frontier army post stands him in good stead; and
he quickly becomes the central figure of the West Point life.


  =The Sandman; His Farm Stories.= By WILLIAM J. HOPKINS.
      With fifty illustrations by Ada Clendenin Williamson.

  Large 12mo, decorative cover                                 $1.50

      "An amusing, original book, written for the benefit of
      very small children. It should be one of the most
      popular of the year's books for reading to small
      children."--_Buffalo Express._


  =The Sandman: More Farm Stories.= By WILLIAM J.
      HOPKINS.

  Large 12mo, decorative cover, fully illustrated              $1.50

Mr. Hopkins's first essay at bedtime stories met with such approval that
this second book of "Sandman" tales was issued for scores of eager
children. Life on the farm, and out-of-doors, is portrayed in his
inimitable manner.


  =The Sandman: His Ship Stories.= By WILLIAM J.
      HOPKINS, author of "The Sandman: His Farm Stories,"
      etc.

  Large 12mo, decorative cover, fully illustrated              $1.50

      "Mothers and fathers and kind elder sisters who put
      the little ones to bed, and rack their brains for
      stories, will find this book a treasure."--_Cleveland
      Leader._

      "Children call for these stories over and over
      again."--_Chicago Evening Post._


  =Pussy-Cat Town.= By MARION AMES TAGGART.

  Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated in
       colors                                                  $1.00

"Pussy-Cat Town" is a most unusual delightful cat story. Ban-Ban, a pure
Maltese who belonged to Rob, Kiku-san, Lois's beautiful snow-white pet,
and their neighbors Bedelia the tortoise-shell, Madame Laura the widow,
Wutz Butz the warrior, and wise old Tommy Traddles, were really and
truly cats.


  =The Roses of Saint Elizabeth.= By JANE SCOTT
      WOODRUFF, author of "The Little Christmas Shoe."

  Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated in
       colors by Adelaide Everhart                             $1.00

This is a charming little story of a child whose father was caretaker of
the great castle of the Wartburg, where Saint Elizabeth once had her
home.


  =Gabriel and the Hour Book.= By EVALEEN STEIN.

  Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
       in colors by Adelaide Everhart                          $1.00

Gabriel was a loving, patient, little French lad, who assisted the monks
in the long ago days, when all the books were written and illuminated by
hand, in the monasteries.


  =The Enchanted Automobile.= Translated from the French
      by MARY J. SAFFORD.

  Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated in
        colors by Edna M. Sawyer                               $1.00

The enchanted automobile was sent by the fairy godmother of a lazy,
discontented little prince and princess to take them to fairyland, where
they might visit their story-book favorites.


  =The Red Feathers.= By THEODORE ROBERTS, author of
      "Brothers of Peril," etc.

  Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"The Red Feathers" tells of the remarkable adventures of an Indian boy
who lived in the Stone Age, many years ago, when the world was young,
and when fairies and magicians did wonderful things for their friends
and enemies.


  =The Wreck of the Ocean Queen.= By James Otis, author
      of "Larry Hudson's Ambition," etc.

  Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

This story takes its readers on a sea voyage around the world; gives
them a trip on a treasure ship; an exciting experience in a terrific
gale; and finally a shipwreck, with a mutineering crew determined to
take the treasure to complicate matters.

But only the mutineers will come to serious harm, and after the reader
has known the thrilling excitement of lack of food and water, of attacks
by night and day, and of a hand-to-hand fight, he is rescued and brought
safely home again,--to realize that it's only a story, but a stirring
and realistic one.


   =Little White Indians.= By FANNIE E. OSTRANDER.

  Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.25

The "Little White Indians" were two families of children who "played
Indian" all one long summer vacation. They built wigwams and made camps;
they went hunting and fought fierce battles on the war-trail.

A bright, interesting story which will appeal strongly to the
"make-believe" instinct in children, and will give them a healthy,
active interest in "the simple life."




_BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE_


=PHYLLIS' FIELD FRIENDS SERIES=

By _LENORE E. MULETS_

Six vols., cloth decorative, illustrated by Sophie Schneider. Sold
separately, or as a set.

    Per volume      $1.00
    Per set          6.00

    =Insect Stories.=
    =Stories of Little Animals.=
    =Flower Stories.=
    =Bird Stories.=
    =Tree Stories.=
    =Stories of Little Fishes.=

In this series of six little Nature books, it is the author's intention
so to present to the child reader the facts about each particular
flower, insect, bird, or animal, in story form, as to make delightful
reading. Classical legends, myths, poems, and songs are so introduced as
to correlate fully with these lessons, to which the excellent
illustrations are no little help.


=THE WOODRANGER TALES=

By _G. WALDO BROWNE_

    =The Woodranger.=
    =The Young Gunbearer.=
    =The Hero of the Hills.=
    =With Rogers' Rangers.=

  Each 1 vol., large 12mo, cloth, decorative cover, illustrated,
      per volume                                                  $1.25
  Four vols., boxed, per set                                       5.00

"The Woodranger Tales," like the "Pathfinder Tales" of J. Fenimore
Cooper, combine historical information relating to early pioneer days in
America with interesting adventures in the backwoods. Although the same
characters are continued throughout the series, each book is complete in
itself, and, while based strictly on historical facts, is an interesting
and exciting tale of adventure.


THE LITTLE COUSIN SERIES

The most delightful and interesting accounts possible of child life in
other lands, filled with quaint sayings, doings, and adventures.

Each one vol., 12mo, decorative cover, cloth, with six or more full-page
illustrations in color.

    Price per volume      $0.60

    By _MARY HAZELTON WADE (unless otherwise indicated)_

    =Our Little African Cousin=

    =Our Little Alaskan Cousin=
      By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    =Our Little Arabian Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little Armenian Cousin=

    =Our Little Brown Cousin=

    =Our Little Canadian Cousin=
      By Elizabeth R. Macdonald

    =Our Little Chinese Cousin=
      By Isaac Taylor Headland

    =Our Little Cuban Cousin=

    =Our Little Dutch Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little English Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little Eskimo Cousin=

    =Our Little French Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little German Cousin=

    =Our Little Hawaiian Cousin=

    =Our Little Hindu Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little Indian Cousin=

    =Our Little Irish Cousin=

    =Our Little Italian Cousin=

    =Our Little Japanese Cousin=

    =Our Little Jewish Cousin=

    =Our Little Korean Cousin=
      By H. Lee M. Pike

    =Our Little Mexican Cousin=
      By Edward C. Butler

    =Our Little Norwegian Cousin=

    =Our Little Panama Cousin=
      By H. Lee M. Pike

    =Our Little Philippine Cousin=

    =Our Little Porto Rican Cousin=

    =Our Little Russian Cousin=

    =Our Little Scotch Cousin=
      By Blanche McManus

    =Our Little Siamese Cousin=

    =Our Little Spanish Cousin=
      By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    =Our Little Swedish Cousin=
      By Claire M. Coburn

    =Our Little Swiss Cousin=

    =Our Little Turkish Cousin=




COSY CORNER SERIES


It is the intention of the publishers that this series shall contain
only the very highest and purest literature,--stories that shall not
only appeal to the children themselves, but be appreciated by all those
who feel with them in their joys and sorrows.

The numerous illustrations in each book are by well-known artists, and
each volume has a separate attractive cover design.

    Each 1 vol., 16mo, cloth      $0.50

By _ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON_


=The Little Colonel.= (Trade Mark.)

The scene of this story is laid in Kentucky. Its heroine is a small
girl, who is known as the Little Colonel, on account of her fancied
resemblance to an old-school Southern gentleman, whose fine estate and
old family are famous in the region.


=The Giant Scissors.=

This is the story of Joyce and of her adventures in France. Joyce is a
great friend of the Little Colonel, and in later volumes shares with her
the delightful experiences of the "House Party" and the "Holidays."


=Two Little Knights of Kentucky.= WHO WERE THE LITTLE COLONEL'S NEIGHBORS.

In this volume the Little Colonel returns to us like an old friend, but
with added grace and charm. She is not, however, the central figure of
the story, that place being taken by the "two little knights."


=Mildred's Inheritance.=

A delightful little story of a lonely English girl who comes to America
and is befriended by a sympathetic American family who are attracted by
her beautiful speaking voice. By means of this one gift she is enabled
to help a school-girl who has temporarily lost the use of her eyes, and
thus finally her life becomes a busy, happy one.


=Cicely and Other Stories for Girls.=

The readers of Mrs. Johnston's charming juveniles will be glad to learn
of the issue of this volume for young people.


=Aunt 'Liza's Hero and Other Stories.=

A collection of six bright little stories, which will appeal to all boys
and most girls.


=Big Brother.=

A story of two boys. The devotion and care of Steven, himself a small
boy, for his baby brother, is the theme of the simple tale.


=Ole Mammy's Torment.=

"Ole Mammy's Torment" has been fitly called "a classic of Southern
life." It relates the haps and mishaps of a small negro lad, and tells
how he was led by love and kindness to a knowledge of the right.


=The Story of Dago.=

In this story Mrs. Johnston relates the story of Dago, a pet monkey,
owned jointly by two brothers. Dago tells his own story, and the account
of his haps and mishaps is both interesting and amusing.


=The Quilt That Jack Built.=

A pleasant little story of a boy's labor of love, and how it changed the
course of his life many years after it was accomplished.


=Flip's Islands of Providence.=

A story of a boy's life battle, his early defeat, and his final triumph,
well worth the reading.




_By EDITH ROBINSON_


=A Little Puritan's First Christmas.=

A Story of Colonial times in Boston, telling how Christmas was invented
by Betty Sewall, a typical child of the Puritans, aided by her brother
Sam.


=A Little Daughter of Liberty.=

The author introduces this story as follows:

"One ride is memorable in the early history of the American Revolution,
the well-known ride of Paul Revere. Equally deserving of commendation is
another ride,--the ride of Anthony Severn,--which was no less historic
in its action or memorable in its consequences."


=A Loyal Little Maid.=

A delightful and interesting story of Revolutionary days, in which the
child heroine, Betsey Schuyler, renders important services to George
Washington.


=A Little Puritan Rebel.=

This is an historical tale of a real girl, during the time when the
gallant Sir Harry Vane was governor of Massachusetts.


=A Little Puritan Pioneer.=

The scene of this story is laid in the Puritan settlement at
Charlestown.


=A Little Puritan Bound Girl.=

A story of Boston in Puritan days, which is of great interest to
youthful readers.


=A Little Puritan Cavalier.=

The story of a "Little Puritan Cavalier" who tried with all his boyish
enthusiasm to emulate the spirit and ideals of the dead Crusaders.


=A Puritan Knight Errant.=

The story tells of a young lad in Colonial times who endeavored to carry
out the high ideals of the knights of olden days.




_By OUIDA (Louise de la Ramée)_


=A Dog of Flanders:= A CHRISTMAS STORY.

Too well and favorably known to require description.


=The Nurnberg Stove.=

This beautiful story has never before been published at a popular price.


_By FRANCES MARGARET FOX_


=The Little Giant's Neighbours.=

A charming nature story of a "little giant" whose neighbours were the
creatures of the field and garden.


=Farmer Brown and the Birds.=

A little story which teaches children that the birds are man's best
friends.


=Betty of Old Mackinaw.=

A charming story of child-life, appealing especially to the little
readers who like stories of "real people."


=Brother Billy.=

The story of Betty's brother, and some further adventures of Betty
herself.


=Mother Nature's Little Ones.=

Curious little sketches describing the early lifetime, or "childhood,"
of the little creatures out-of-doors.


=How Christmas Came to the Mulvaneys.=

A bright, lifelike little story of a family of poor children, with an
unlimited capacity for fun and mischief. The wonderful never-to-be
forgotten Christmas that came to them is the climax of a series of
exciting incidents.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 265, "Hie" changed to "His" (His broad clear brow)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Colonel at Boarding-School, by 
Annie Fellows Johnston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE COLONEL AT BOARDING SCHOOL ***

***** This file should be named 38939-8.txt or 38939-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/9/3/38939/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
