The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Colonel's Knight Comes Riding, by 
Annie Fellows Johnston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Colonel's Knight Comes Riding

Author: Annie Fellows Johnston

Illustrator: Etheldred B. Barry

Release Date: May 2, 2012 [EBook #39594]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










[Illustration: Cover]




THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT COMES RIDING




Works of ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON


The Little Colonel Series

(_Trade Mark, Reg. U. S. Pat. Of._)

Each one vol., large 12mo, cloth, illustrated

  The Little Colonel Stories                         $1.50
    (Containing in one volume the three stories,
    "The Little Colonel," "The Giant Scissors," and
    "Two Little Knights of Kentucky.")
  The Little Colonel's House Party                    1.50
  The Little Colonel's Holidays                       1.50
  The Little Colonel's Hero                           1.50
  The Little Colonel at Boarding-School               1.50
  The Little Colonel in Arizona                       1.50
  The Little Colonel's Christmas Vacation             1.50
  The Little Colonel: Maid of Honor                   1.50
  The Little Colonel's Knight Comes Riding            1.50
  Mary Ware: The Little Colonel's Chum                1.50
    The above 10 vols., _boxed_                 15.00


  The Little Colonel Good Times Book                  1.50


  Illustrated Holiday Editions

  Each one vol., small quarto, cloth, illustrated, and printed in colour

  The Little Colonel                                 $1.25
  The Giant Scissors                                  1.25
  Two Little Knights of Kentucky                      1.25
  Big Brother                                         1.25


  Cosy Corner Series

  Each one vol., thin 12mo, cloth, illustrated

  The Little Colonel                                  $.50
  The Giant Scissors                                   .50
  Two Little Knights of Kentucky                       .50
  Big Brother                                          .50
  Ole Mammy's Torment                                  .50
  The Story of Dago                                    .50
  Cicely                                               .50
  Aunt 'Liza's Hero                                    .50
  The Quilt that Jack Built                            .50
  Flip's "Islands of Providence"                       .50
  Mildred's Inheritance                                .50


  Other Books

  Joel: A Boy of Galilee                             $1.50
  In the Desert of Waiting                             .50
  The Three Weavers                                    .50
  Keeping Tryst                                        .50
  The Legend of the Bleeding Heart                     .50
  The Rescue of the Princess Winsome                   .50
  Asa Holmes                                          1.00
  Songs Ysame (Poems, with Albion Fellows Bacon)      1.00

                  L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    200 Summer Street                   Boston, Mass.

[Illustration: "WITH THE DONNING OF THE ANCIENT DRESS SHE SEEMED TO HAVE
PUT ON THE SWEET SHY MANNER THAT HAD BEEN THE CHARM OF ITS FIRST
WEARER."

(_See page 142_)]




THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT COMES RIDING


BY ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON

    AUTHOR OF
    "THE LITTLE COLONEL SERIES," "BIG BROTHER,"
    "OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT," "JOEL: A BOY
    OF GALILEE," "ASA HOLMES," ETC.


    Illustrated by
    ETHELDRED B. BARRY


    "And sometimes in the mirror blue,
    The knights come riding, two by two."
               THE LADY OF SHALOTT.

[Illustration]

    BOSTON
    L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    PUBLISHERS




    _Copyright, 1907_
    BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    (INCORPORATED)

    _Entered at Stationers' Hall, London_

    _All rights reserved_

    First impression, October, 1907
    Second impression, April, 1909

    _COLONIAL PRESS
    Electrotyped and Printed by C. H. Simonds & Co.
    Boston, U. S. A._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                  PAGE
     I. THE HANGING OF THE MIRROR                             1
    II. BED-TIME CONFIDENCES                                 27
   III. A KNIGHT COMES RIDING                                46
    IV. BETTY'S NOVEL                                        68
     V. A CAMERA HELPS                                       97
    VI. "GARDEN FANCIES"                                    116
   VII. SPANISH LESSONS                                     134
  VIII. "SHADOWS OF THE WORLD APPEAR"                       161
    IX. MORE SHADOWS                                        181
     X. BY THE SILVER YARD-STICK                            199
    XI. THE END OF SEVERAL THINGS                           221
   XII. SIX MONTHS LATER                                    242
  XIII. THE MIRACLE OF BLOSSOMING                           266
   XIV. THE ROYAL MANTLE                                    285
    XV. "AS IT WAS WRITTEN IN THE STARS" AND BETTY'S DIARY  308




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                           PAGE
  "WITH THE DONNING OF THE ANCIENT DRESS SHE SEEMED
      TO HAVE PUT ON THE SWEET SHY MANNER THAT HAD
      BEEN THE CHARM OF ITS FIRST WEARER"
      (_See page 142_)                             _Frontispiece_

  "THE OTHER GRASPED SOME DARK OBJECT THAT SEEMED TO
      BE A PICTURE FRAME"                                     6

  "DREW REIN A MOMENT AT THE GATE, TO LOOK DOWN THE
      STATELY AVENUE"                                        47

  "HE WAS BENDING ANXIOUSLY OVER A BUBBLING SAUCEPAN"        87

  "MAKING A CUP OF HER WHITE HANDS"                         126

  "FOR ONCE THE RED AND GREEN BIRD WAS ON ITS GOOD
      BEHAVIOUR"                                            180

  "SHE POURED THE CORN INTO THE POPPER AND BEGAN TO
      SHAKE IT OVER THE RED COALS"                          261

  "'SHE LOOKED TO ME JUST LIKE ONE OF HER OWN LILIES'"      315




THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT COMES RIDING


CHAPTER I

THE HANGING OF THE MIRROR


IT was a June morning in Kentucky. The doctor's nephew coming at a
gallop down the pike into Lloydsboro Valley, reined his horse to a walk
as he reached the railroad crossing, and leaning forward in his saddle,
hesitated a moment between the two roads.

The one along the railroad embankment was sweet with a tangle of wild
honeysuckle, and led straight to the little post-office where his
morning mail awaited him. The other would take him a mile out of his
way, but it was through a thick beech woods, and the cool leafage of its
green aisles tempted him. A red-bird darting on ahead suddenly decided
his course, for following some quick impulse, as if the cardinal wings
had beckoned him, he turned off the highway into the woods.

"I might as well go around and have a look at that Lindsey Cabin," he
said to himself, as an excuse for turning aside. "If it's in as good
shape as I think it is, maybe I can persuade the Van Allens to rent it
for the summer. It's a pity to have a picturesque place like that
standing empty when it has such possibilities for hospitality, and the
Van Allen girls a positive genius for giving jolly house-parties. To get
that family out to Lloydsboro for the summer would be paving the way to
no end of good times."

The farther he rode into the cool woods the better the idea pleased him,
and where the bridle-path crossed a narrow creek he paused a moment
before plunging down the bank. Somewhere up the ravine a spring was
trickling out in a ceaseless flow. He could not see it, but he could
hear the gurgle of the water, as cold and crystal clear it splashed down
into its rocky basin.

"They could picnic here to their hearts' content," he said aloud,
glancing up and down the ravine at the rank growth of fern and
maidenhair which festooned the rocks.

Alex Shelby had spent only part of two summers in Lloydsboro Valley, but
the woodsy smell of mint and pennyroyal, mingling with the fern, brought
back the recollection of at least a dozen picnics he had enjoyed near
this spot, most of them moonlight affairs, and all of them so pleasant
that he was determined to bring about their repetition if possible. Of
course this summer he would not have as much time for outings as he had
had then. Now that he had finished his medical course he intended to
shoulder as much as possible of his uncle's work. The old doctor's
practice had grown far too heavy for him. But at the same time there
need be no limit to the pleasant things that the summer could bring
forth, especially if the Van Allen family could be installed in the
Lindsey Cabin.

A quarter of a mile more brought him almost to the edge of the woods and
to the beginning of the Lindsey place. The spacious, two-story log cabin
standing back among the great forest trees, might have been a relic of
Daniel Boone's day, so carefully had his pioneer pattern been copied by
skilful architects. But the resemblance was only outward. Inside it was
luxuriously equipped with every modern convenience. For a year it had
stood tenant-less, and Alex Shelby never passed it without regretting
that such a charming old place should be abandoned to dust and spiders.
The last time he had gone by it, he had noticed that it was beginning to
show the effect of its long neglect. Some of the windows were completely
overgrown by ragged rose-vines and Virginia Creeper, and a tin
waterspout that had blown loose from its fastenings, dangled from the
eaves.

Now as he came near he saw in surprise that the place seemed to have an
alert, live air, as if just awakened from sleep. The windows were all
thrown open, the vines were trimmed, and were a mass of bloom, the dead
leaves were raked neatly in piles and the cobwebs no longer hung from
the cornices in dusty festoons.

A long ladder leaning against the front of the house, rested on the sill
of an upper window, and Alex wondered if the agents had painters at
work. He hoped so. The more thorough the renovation, the more attractive
it would be to the Van Allens.

Suddenly his pleased expression changed to one of surprise and dismay,
as he saw that the place was already inhabited. Empty packing-boxes,
excelsior and wrapping paper littered the front porch. A new hammock
hung between the posts. Somebody's garden-hat lay on the steps.
Moreover, a slender girl in a white dress stood at the foot of the
ladder, evidently about to ascend, for she shook it to test its balance,
and then cautiously stepped up on the first round.

Her back was toward Alex, and he fervently hoped that she would turn
around so that he might see her face, then more fervently hoped that she
wouldn't, since it would be somewhat embarrassing to be caught staring
as inquisitively as he was doing. Unconsciously at sight of her he had
brought his horse to a standstill, and now sat wondering who she could
be and what she was about to do. It was as if a curtain had gone up on
the first scene of an intensely interesting play, and for the moment he
forgot everything else in admiration of the stage setting, and the
graceful little figure poised on the ladder.

"Probably going up for an armful of roses," he thought.

"Hold tight, Ca'line Allison! Don't let it slip!" she called in a high
sweet voice, almost as if she were singing the words, and Alex noticed
for the first time, a small coloured girl behind the ladder, bracing
herself against it to hold it steady.

The ascent was a slow one. Twice she tripped on her skirts, and with a
little shriek almost slipped through between the rounds. Only one hand
was free for climbing. The other grasped some dark object that seemed to
be a picture frame, though why one should be carrying a picture frame up
the outside of a house was more than the young man could imagine, and he
concluded he must be mistaken.

[Illustration: "THE OTHER GRASPED SOME DARK OBJECT THAT SEEMED TO BE A
PICTURE FRAME."]

The last step brought her head on a level with the second story window,
and up where the sun struck through the trees in a broad shaft of light.
Her hair had been beautiful in the shadow; a rare tint of auburn with
bronze gold glints, but now in the sunshine it was an aureole. What was
it it reminded him of? A fragment of a half-forgotten poem came to his
mind, although he was not given to remembering such things:

    "Sandalphon the angel of glory,
     Sandalphon the angel of prayer."

Then he almost laughed aloud at the comparison, for a dazzling flash of
light, blinding him for an instant, was reflected into his eyes from the
object she carried, and he saw that it was a looking-glass that she was
taking up the ladder with such care.

"What a very human and very feminine angel of glory it is," he
thought. But the next instant, still with the amused smile on his face,
he was spurring his horse down the road as fast as it could gallop. The
girl on the ladder had caught sight of his reflection in the mirror as
she reached up to lay it on the window sill, and had turned a startled
face towards him. Not for worlds would he have had her know that he had
been so discourteous as to sit staring at her. He had forgotten himself
in the interest of the moment.

Eager to find out who the new tenants were at the Lindsey Cabin, he rode
rapidly on, turning from the woodland road into a maple-lined avenue
leading back to the post-office. Just as he made the turn another
surprise confronted him. He almost collided with two girls who were
hurrying along arm in arm, under a red parasol.

Both Lloyd Sherman and Kitty Walton were old friends of his, but he had
to look twice to assure himself that he saw aright. They had been away
at school all year, and he had not heard of their return.

"I thought you were still at Warwick Hall!" he exclaimed, dismounting
and stepping forward with bared head, to shake hands in his most cordial
way. "When did you get home?"

"Only this mawning," answered Lloyd. "All the Commencement exercises
were ovah last Thursday, and we're school girls no longah. '_Beyond, the
Alps lies Italy!_' Kitty can tell you all about it, for she had the
Valedictory."

Kitty met Alex's amused smile with a flash of her black eyes, but before
she could deny having used the trite subject that had been so popular in
the old Lloydsboro seminary as to have become a standing joke, Alex
answered, "Well, you've certainly lost no time in starting out to
explore the wide world that lies before you. I've always heard that
there's nothing to equal the zeal of a sweet girl graduate about to
scale her Alps. You've barely reached home, haven't been off the cars
three hours, I'll bet, and yet here you are on the war-path again. What
Italy are you climbing after now?"

Ordinarily his banter would have been promptly resented by both girls,
but now it served only to recall the amazing news that had sent them
hurrying away from the post-office on an excited quest. With a dramatic
gesture, Kitty drew a letter from her belt and held it out to him.

"Think of it!" she exclaimed, her cheeks pink with excitement. "Gay
Melville's here in the Valley! Right here in Lloydsboro! Settled in the
Lindsey Cabin for the summer, and we didn't know anything about it till
ten minutes ago."

"Gay Melville," repeated Alex, instantly alert at mention of the cabin.

"Oh he doesn't know her, Kitty," interposed Lloyd. "He wasn't out in the
Valley the wintah she spent her Christmas vacation with you."

"Then you've something to live for!" declared Kitty with emphasis.
"She's one of the old Warwick Hall girls. Was in last year's class with
Allison and Betty, and she's just the sweetest, dearest--"

"Don't tell him any moah," interrupted Lloyd. "Let him find out for
himself."

"What's she doing at the Lindsey Cabin?" he asked. He kept a straight
face, although inwardly chuckling over the fact that he knew well enough
what she was doing, at least what she had been doing three minutes ago.

"They've taken it for the summer, that is, her sister Lucy and husband
have, Mr. and Mrs. Jameson Harcourt. They're from San Antonio, and you
know the Lindseys spend their winters there. It seems they interested
Mr. Harcourt in the Cabin, and of course Gay was wild to get back to
the Valley, and she persuaded them to come. She wrote to me just as soon
as it was decided, but the letter never reached me till this morning.
She thought I would get it before I started home; but it's just like Gay
to mix up her address with mine. She was so excited when she wrote that
she addressed it to Warwick Hall Station, Texas, instead of District of
Columbia. It has been travelling all over the country, and it's a wonder
that it ever reached me at all."

"And the worst of it is," added Lloyd, "of co'se she expected we'd all
be heah to meet her. But we stayed ovah in Washington two days, and when
they came in last night there wasn't a soul at the station to welcome
them. The ticket agent told me about it just now as we came past. She
seemed surprised, he said, and disappointed. She must have thought it
queah that none of us were there."

"Won't she be funny when she's found what a mistake she's made!"
exclaimed Kitty. "She's always making mistakes, and is always perfectly
ridiculous over them when she finds it out. We're going to take you to
call on her, Alex, just as soon as they're settled. She plays the violin
divinely."

"I'll go right back with you now," he offered promptly.

"No you won't," they cried in the same breath, and Kitty explained, "No
telling what sort of a mess they'll be in with their unpacking. But if
they're ready to see company by night, I'll telephone to you, and we'll
all go over."

"I shall live only for that moment," he declared, laughing, then added
as he turned to mount his horse, "I'm mighty glad I met you, and I'm
more than glad that you've both come home to stay."

A flourish of the red parasol answered the courtly sweep of his hat as
they parted. He rode on rapidly towards the post-office, wondering if
they would find the girlish, white-clad figure still perched on the
ladder, up among the roses, with the sun making an aureole of her
shining hair. He had never seen such hair. "Sandalphon, the angel of
glory"--but the quotation broke off with a laugh. Her name was Gay, and
it was a looking glass that she was carrying up the ladder. "Well, she's
an original little thing," he mused, "and if she lives up to her name
the Lindsey Cabin will be just as lively a social centre as if the Van
Allen girls had possession."

The encounter with Alex had delayed the girls but a moment or two, still
they walked on faster than ever to make up the lost time.

"What do you suppose we'll find her doing?" queried Lloyd.

"Something unexpected, I'll be bound," was the answer. "Will you ever
forget that first time we saw her, when she came out to play the violin
at the Freshman reception? Such a pretty white dress, and that rapt,
uplifted look on her face that makes you think of St. Cecilias and
seraphim, and with one foot in a white kid shoe, and the other in that
awful old red felt bedroom slipper, edged in black fur!"

"Or the time she lost her belt in Washington," suggested Lloyd.
"Probably we'll find her unpacking if the trunks came. But Gay's trunks
nevah were known to arrive on time. We may have to be lending her
shirtwaists and collahs for a month."

By this time they had reached the rustic footbridge leading over a
ravine to the Cabin, and were in full view of the front windows. Gay was
still on the ladder. She had made several trips up and down it since
Alex passed. It was hard to decide at what angle to hang the mirror on
the window casing, as she had seen them in old Dutch houses in Holland;
and in marking the place with the point of the only nail that she had
provided on which to hang the mirror, she dropped the nail. Several
minutes had been wasted in a fruitless search for it. Others were to be
had for the pulling, if one could extract them from the empty
packing-boxes, but no hammer could be found on the premises, and it was
only after much twisting and struggling that the little coloured girl
finally managed to pull one with her teeth.

Another five minutes had been wasted in searching for something with
which to drive the nail. Then Gay gingerly ascended the ladder again,
armed with a pair of heavy old tongs, taken from the porch fireplace.
She had just reached the top of the ladder when the girls caught sight
of her.

"Mercy!" exclaimed Kitty in a low tone. "It'll never do in the world to
appear at _this_ juncture. She's pretty sure to drop through the ladder
anyhow, or upset herself, or have some exhibition of the usual Melville
luck, even if she's left to herself. And if she should suddenly discover
us there's no telling what dreadful thing might happen."

"Let's slip up behind the arbour and watch till she's safely down to
earth," whispered Lloyd. "What _do_ you suppose she's trying to do, and
where do you suppose she managed to pick up Ca'line Allison?"

"Sh!" was the answer. "That's the Dutch mirror she got in Amsterdam
last summer. She wrote that it was the triumph of her life when she got
home with it whole. She carried it all the way, instead of packing it in
her trunk. Listen! What's that she's saying?"

The words floated down to them distinctly. "Ca'line Allison, you'll have
to get me something besides these tongs to drive this nail with. I might
as well try to do it with a pair of stilts. Besides it's making dents in
them, and it's wicked to spoil such beautiful old brasses. Mercy! Don't
get up _yet_!" she shrieked wildly, as the shifting of Ca'line Allison's
small body made the ladder slip a trifle.

"Wait till I poke these tongs through the window and take hold with both
hands. Now! Hunt around and find me a stone or a piece of brick."

The girls behind the arbour could not see her face, but the sight of the
familiar little figure clinging to the ladder, and the sound of the
beloved voice made them long to rush out and squeeze her.

"Isn't her hair a glory, up there in the sunshine?" whispered Kitty.
"The idea of anybody calling it plain red--such a fluff of bronzy auburn
with all those little crinkles of gold! And listen to that whistle!
You'd think it was a real mocking bird."

Wholly unconscious of her audience, Gay teetered on the ladder,
whistling and trilling like a happy bobolink, until the little black
girl climbed up after her with a brick which she had dug out from the
well curb. The girls waited until the nail was securely in place, the
mirror hung and Gay had begun to crawl down the ladder backward, before
they rushed out from their hiding-place.

They pounced upon her just as she reached the bottom round, and then
ensued what Kitty called a pow-wow--an enthusiastic welcome known only
to old school chums who have been separated so long a time as a whole
twelvemonth. Questions, answers, explanations, a bubbling over of
delight at once more being together, kept them talking all at once for
nearly ten minutes. Then Gay, remembering her duty as hostess led the
way into the house.

"Come in and see Lucy and her fond spouse," she exclaimed. "They're
still at breakfast although it's ten o'clock. None of us could make a
fire in the range. It simply wouldn't burn. But we had brought a chafing
dish in one of the boxes, and we found another in the pantry, and
they've been mussing around for the last two hours with them, having the
time of their lives. Lucy made fudge and omelette and tea for her
breakfast, being the things she knows best how to make, and brother
Jameson is trying flap-jacks and coffee."

"What did you have?" asked Lloyd.

"I? Oh I emulated the example of 'The old person of Crewd' who said

    "'We use sawdust for food.
     It's cheap by the ton
     And it nourishes one,
     And that's the main object of food.'

I munched a handful of some sort of new breakfast straw, but it wasn't
very satisfying, and I was just going in to get a cup of brother
Jameson's coffee. I told him to put my name in the pot. Come on in and
have some too."

Throwing open the dining-room door she began a series of breezy
introductions that set them all to laughing and swept away every vestige
of formality.

Both Lloyd and Kitty protested against taking a single mouthful at that
hour, but the young host poured out a cup of very muddy coffee with such
a beaming smile, and the little bride offered a very bitter cup of tea
in competition, with a merry insistence so like Gay's, that they could
not refuse.

"It's going to be lovely," Kitty managed to whisper under cover of the
bustle of bringing in more hot water. "They're almost as harum-scarum
and hap-hazard as Gay herself, and 'brother Jameson' looks as if he
might be the 'Gibson man's' youngest brother."

"These 'babes in the wood' would have perished but for me," began Gay,
who was rattling along as if she were wound up. "_I_ was the robin who
came to the rescue. I went over to Stumptown bright and early--you see I
remembered the short cut through the woods--and as luck would have it,
found some one willing to come, at the very first house where I
inquired. (But she can't come till nearly noon, hence this disorderly
feasting and rioting.) Ca'line Allison was swinging on the gate, with
her finger in her mouth. I didn't know her, but she remembered me, and
complimented me by asking if I'd done brought my fiddle along. I think
I'll engage her for the summer for my little maid-in-waiting. She's as
quick as a monkey and would look so cunning diked up in a cap and apron.
What's that rhyme Betty made about her when she was flower-girl at her
own mother's wedding? Oh by the way, where _is_ Betty? Why didn't she
come with you?"

"For the good reason that we didn't know we were coming heah ourselves
when we left home," answered Lloyd. "Betty went on to Commencement with
all the rest of the family, but it was hard for her to tear herself away
from her beloved writing. We hadn't been back at Locust half an houah
this mawning till she was at it again."

"Betty is Mrs. Sherman's god-daughter," explained Gay in an aside to her
brother-in-law. "The one who I told you is such a genius. She's writing
a book." Then turning to Lloyd. "It isn't that same old one she was at
work on at school, is it?"

"No, it's something she began last fall. Mothah wanted her to make her
début in Louisville when she was through school, just as I am going to
do next wintah, but Betty begged to be allowed to stay in the country.
She said she'd nevah be a brilliant success socially, but that she'd do
her best to be a credit to the family in some other way."

"She will, too," prophesied Gay. "Some day we'll all be proud of the
little song-bird you rescued from the Cuckoo's Nest. Dear old Betty! I'd
like to hug her this very minute."

The grandfather's clock in the hall was striking eleven when they rose
from the table, but Gay would not listen when the girls attempted to
take their leave. "You haven't seen my room," she insisted, "nor my
mirror. Come on up stairs and look into my mirror. It's the joy of my
heart, and maybe we'll all see our fate in it. I like to pretend that
it's a sort of magic glass--that some wizard of the wood has laid a
spell on it, so that at certain times all the figures that have ever
been reflected in it must march across it again. Wouldn't it be lovely
if all the good times it is going to reflect this summer could be made
to pass over it again whenever I wanted to recall them?"

"We'd lead the procession," announced Kitty, "for we were the first
objects that crossed the path after you got it hung. If we were not 'a
group of damsels glad' we were at least a couple of them."

"But you were not the first," confessed Gay. "Just as I held it up to
adjust it, I had such a thrillingly romantic experience that I nearly
fell off the ladder. It showed me the reflection of an awfully good
looking young man on horse-back. But when I turned to look over my
shoulder at the original he was galloping down the road like a blue
streak."

"I wondah who it could have been," mused Lloyd. "We met Alex Shelby on
hawseback just a few minutes befoah we got heah, but he nevah said a
word about having seen anybody, and he seemed surprised when we told him
that the cabin had been rented."

They were up in Gay's room now, and running to the window, Kitty seated
herself in the low chair beside it. "Oh how fine!" she called. "It's at
exactly the right angle, for I can see everything along the path without
looking out. It'll be a sort of Hildegarde's mirror, won't it! Like the
Lady of Shalott's."

Half under her breath she began to recite the lines they had learned so
long ago, and from force of habit Lloyd joined the sing-song chant:

    "And moving through the mirror clear
     That hangs before her all the year,
     Shadows of the world appear."

Smiling to see how well they remembered it, they went on in unison down
to the couplet:

    "And sometimes through the mirror blue
     The knights come riding two by two."

There Kitty broke off to say "I don't see how that can happen here
_this_ summer. It will be sheer luck if they come even in singles. There
never were so few boys left in the Valley, and it's too bad to have it
happen so the summer that you're here. Nearly everybody is going away.
You can count on the fingers of one hand the few who will stay."

"What about the two knights of Kentucky?" asked Gay. "You're a lucky
girl, Kitty, to have two such splendid cousins as Keith and Malcolm
MacIntyre."

"They are already gone. They sailed for England with Uncle Sydney and
Aunt Elise last week. You know I wrote you they were going and that
Allison was to be in the party too. And oh Gay! Didn't you get that
letter? Then you haven't heard the most important thing of all! _Allison
is engaged!_ It didn't happen till a few days before they sailed, and it
isn't announced yet, but of course she wanted you to know and I wrote to
you right away."

Gay bounced out of her chair as if a bomb exploded in the room.

"Oh you don't mean it!" she cried tragically, clasping her hands. "Why
she's only been out of school a year! The first of our class to go! Oh
tell me all about it! Begin at the beginning and don't skip a thing!"

Throwing herself down on the floor at Kitty's feet, she propped her chin
on her hands, and her elbows in Kitty's lap, prepared to listen.

"There isn't much to tell. You know the fortune that Mammy Easter
predicted for her was nice, but it wasn't very exciting. She was to 'wed
wid de quality and ride in her ca'iage.' Well, his family is certainly
quality, the Claibornes of Virginia, and she'll live in Washington and
have several kinds of carriages. Isn't it odd? We knew him when he was
just a boy. He was on the same transport with us when we went to the
Philippines, and we never imagined then that we'd ever see him again."

"But I thought that that young Lieutenant Logan," began Gay.

Kitty interrupted her with a laugh. "Why my dear, he is a mere _child_
compared to Raleigh Claiborne. That little affair was the mere A. B. C.
of romance. He's paying attention to our youngest now. He sends music
and bon bons to _Elise_."

"Think of Elise being old enough to receive such attentions!" groaned
Gay. "It makes me feel like a patriarch. But never mind my hoary
sensations, go on and tell me some more. She's going to get her
trousseau abroad I suppose."

"Only part of it, for the wedding isn't to take place for a year.
Allison didn't care much about going--thought she'd rather wait and take
the trip with Raleigh. But he is so busy it may be several years before
he can get off for a whole summer, and Aunt Elise persuaded her to go
with them. She said it wouldn't be so easy for her to go when she once
assumed the responsibility of a big establishment."

Gay clasped her hands around her knees and rocked herself back and forth
on the floor.

"I'm glad she's sensible enough to wait a year," she declared. "I don't
see why girls are in such a hurry to tie themselves up in a knot. I
suppose it's perfectly fascinating to be engaged and to have the
choosing of a lovely trousseau, and the opening of all the wedding
presents. Everybody takes so much interest in a prospective bride. But
the fun comes to an end so quickly. It's like Fourth of July fire works.
There's a big blaze and excitement while it lasts. Then it's all over
and they settle down to be just prosy common-place married people. I
should think that the reaction would be deadly, and that if a girl could
see past the time of the rocket's shooting up, and realize that it can't
stay among the stars, but must fall to earth again with a dull thud,
she'd profit by other people's experiences, and not give up all the good
times of her girlhood before she'd half enjoyed them."

Gay spoke so feelingly that her two listeners exchanged glances of
surprise. This was not the way Gay had been wont to talk a year ago, and
each wondered to herself if Lucy's marriage had caused this radical
change in her opinion.

Suddenly she changed the subject, with the unexpectedness of a
grasshopper's leap. "Which one of you girls is going to stay all night
with me?"

Kitty answered first. "Neither of us ought to, for we've only just
returned to the bosom of our families. You could hardly call us entirely
arrived yet, for our trunks haven't come."

Lloyd started up, and looked at her watch in alarm. "It's a good thing
you reminded me that I have a home," she laughed. "I told mothah I'd
just stroll down to the post-office and be right back, and when I met
Kitty with yoah lettah it drove everything else out of my head. She'll
be wondering what has happened to me. I'll come some night next week and
be glad to."

"No, one of you has to come back and stay with me _to-night_," Gay
insisted. "So settle it between yourselves. You may as well draw straws
to decide which is to be my victim." Then, glancing around the room--"I
don't happen to see any straws at hand, but you might pull hairs for
the honour. Here! My head is at your service, ladies."

Dropping to her knees she made a profound salaam, and waited for them to
draw. "The one who pulls the shortest hair comes back."

Laughing over the absurd manner of deciding such a matter, each girl
reached out and plucked a hair by its roots, so vigorously that the pull
was followed by a long drawn "ouch!"

"Mine's the shortest," giggled Lloyd, comparing it with the one that
Kitty held up. "But I'm suah my family will object if I propose leaving
them the very first night of my arrival, aftah I've been away at school
all yeah."

"Don't leave them then," said Gay. "Bring them all over here to spend
the evening. I'm wild for Lucy and brother Jameson to meet them as soon
as possible. Then when bedtime comes let them leave you. Tell them that
Kitty is going to bring all her family, and that everybody in the valley
who is anybody is coming to the Harcourt's Housewarming to-night at the
'Cabin in the Wood.'"

Kitty began unfurling her red parasol. "That certainly sounds alluring.
You can count on all my family, especially Ranald, and I'll go straight
home and telephone to Alex Shelby."

"Who may he be?" inquired Gay, scrambling up from the floor, to follow
her guests down stairs.

Kitty began an enthusiastic description of him, which Lloyd cut short
with the laughing remark, "Go look in your little Dutch mirror. I'm not
positive, but I _think_ he's yoah first 'Knight of the Looking-glass.'"




CHAPTER II

BED-TIME CONFIDENCES


THAT night a series of interesting shadows trooped across the little
Dutch mirror, in the moonlight, but nobody watched beside it to see how
faithfully it reflected the procession of guests, straggling up the path
below. After the first pleased glance Gay had flown down-stairs to throw
open the front door and bid them welcome. It was almost more than she
had dared to hope that the old Colonel would come, and "Papa Jack" and
Kitty's Grandmother MacIntyre. But they had needed no urging. Gay was
reaping the aftermath now, of her first visit to the Valley. They had
not forgotten the obliging little guest who had entertained them with
her violin playing, amused them with her quaint unexpected speeches, and
charmed old and young alike with her enthusiastic interest in everything
and everybody.

Ranald had more than that to remember, for he had carried on a vigorous
correspondence with Gay for the last six months, started by a "dare"
from Allison. Alex Shelby's memory of her dated back only to that
morning, but the picture of a sunny little head up among the roses, and
that line "Sandalphon the angel of glory" had been in his thoughts all
day.

Their effort to show the newcomers how cordial a Lloydsboro welcome
could be, was met by a hospitality which held them in its spell till
after midnight. Lucy was in her element. As the popular daughter of a
popular army officer, she had played gracious hostess ever since she had
learned to talk. As for Gay, so anxious was she that her friends should
be pleased with her family and her family with her friends, that she
threw herself with all her might into the task of making each show off
to the other.

An outside fire-place on the broad front porch was one of the features
of the Cabin. The June night was cool enough to make the blaze on its
hearth acceptable, and Lucy turned the picturesque old kettle, bubbling
on the crane, to practical use, making coffee to serve with the
marsh-mallows, which Jameson handed around on long sticks, that each one
might toast his own over the glowing coals.

The informality of it all, and the good cheer, made every one relax into
his jolliest mood, and Gay, hearing the old Colonel's laugh, as
stretched out on the settle by the fire, he told stories and toasted
marsh-mallows with a zest, felt that they had struck the right key-note
in this first evening's entertainment. It was the harbinger of many
others that would follow during the summer.

It was her violin that held them longest. Standing just inside the door
where Kitty could accompany her on the piano, she played one after
another of the favourite tunes that were called for in turn, till the
fire burned low on the porch hearth, and even the voices of the night
were stilled in the dense beech woods around the Cabin.

It was later than any one had supposed when Mrs. Sherman made the
discovery that the hall clock had stopped.

"She didn't know that I stopped it on purpose," confessed Gay, when the
last carriage had driven away, and Lloyd was following her sleepily
up-stairs. She paused to bolt the bed-room door behind them.

"This has been a lovely evening for me. It gives one such a comfortable
I-told-you-so sort of feeling to have everything turn out as you
prophesied it would. Of course I knew that Lucy would feel the charm of
the Valley, and like it a thousand times better than the mountains or
seashore or anywhere else, but I wasn't so sure of Jameson. Now my mind
is completely at rest for the summer. I stopped worrying when I saw him
hobnobbing with the Colonel and your father about those Lexington horses
he wants to buy. He was so tickled over those letters of introduction
they gave him. And he was so charmed to air his knowledge of the
Philippines to Mrs. Walton. He spent a month there you know. I fairly
patted myself on the back all the time he was talking. Somehow I feel so
responsible for this household. There! I forgot to remind them to bring
that bothersome old silver pitcher upstairs!"

Hastily unbolting the door she called out in sepulchral tones that
echoed through the dark house, "_Remember the Maine!_"

There was a laugh in the room across the hall, then her brother-in-law
who had just come up-stairs, shuffled down again in his slippers.

"I suppose I'll have to remind them every night this summer," continued
Gay. "I don't like to call out 'remember the silver pitcher that was our
great-great-grandmother Melville's, and the soup ladle that some old
Spanish grandee gave to one of Jameson's Castilian ancestors,' for if a
burglar were prowling around he would be all the more anxious to break
in. So the month I visited them, before we came here, I adopted that
slogan for my war-cry: '"_Remember the main_" thing in life to be saved
from burglars!' It always sends one or the other of them skipping, for
they feel the responsibility of preserving such heirlooms for posterity.
I used to wish that I were the oldest daughter, so that that pitcher
would be handed down to me on my wedding day. I didn't realize what a
bore it would be to be tied for life to such a responsibility. I asked
Jameson why he didn't put it and the ladle in a safety vault and be done
with it, and he read me such a lecture on the sacredness of old
associations and family ties that I somehow felt that his old soup-ladle
expected me to send it a written apology."

Gay had bolted the door again, and as she talked, drew the curtains
across the casement windows. Now she sat on the edge of the bed, shaking
out her wealth of sunny hair, to brush and braid it for the night. It
was a cosy room, with low ceiling and old-fashioned wall paper. With the
curtains drawn and the candles in the quaint pewter sticks lighting up
the claw-footed mahogany furniture, it was an ideal place for the
exchanging of bedtime confidences. Gay was the first to break the
silence.

"What was the matter with Betty tonight? She was as quiet as a mouse.
Hardly had a word to say, and all the time I was playing, she sat
looking out into the night as if she were ready to cry."

"No wondah! They were so beautiful, some of those nocturnes and things,
that we all had lumps in our throats. Nothing's the mattah with Betty.
It's just the last chaptah she can't get to suit her. She's gone around
in a sawt of dream all day."

"Who's playing the devoted to her now?"

"Nobody as far as I know. _All_ the boys love Betty. They've been
perfectly devoted to her ever since she came to Locust to live; but
not--not in the sentimental way you mean; for instance the way that Alex
Shelby cares for Kitty."

"Oh _don't_ tell me there is anything in that," wailed Gay, "at least on
Kitty's part, for I've set my heart on her marrying a friend of mine in
San Antonio, so she'll always be near me. You know when Mammy Easter
told her fortune, it was that her fate would come through running water
when the weather vane points _West_. I'm wild to have her visit me at
Fort Sam Houston next year, and this Frank Percival is the very one of
all others for her. He's a banker and as good as gold and--oh well,
there's no use wasting time singing his praises to _you_ when I want him
for Kitty! But about this Alex Shelby, Kitty told me this very afternoon
that it is _you_ he admires so much. She told me all about that Bernice
Howe affair, and said that ever since Katie Mallard up and told him how
honourably you acted in the matter, he has put you on a pedestal and
given you a halo. She said you could have him crazy about you if you'd
so much as lift an eyelash in encouragement."

"Don't you believe it!" cried Lloyd. "That's just Kitty's way of
throwing you off the track. We've been unusually good friends evah since
he found out why I broke my engagement to go riding with him, but he is
at The Beeches every bit as much as he is at The Locusts, and it's you
he'll be in love with befoah the summah is ovah. He was the first one
reflected in yoah looking glass, for he confessed this evening how he
sat and watched you on the laddah, and how he'd thought of you all day;
and he even quoted poetry about it, and that's a very serious symptom
for Alex to show. He nevah was known to do such things befoah! Then
tonight he was simply carried away by yoah playing. He adores a violin
and you played all his favourites. Oh I see yoah finish!"

There was a pause in which Gay kicked off her slippers and sat absently
gazing at them, while Lloyd tied the ribbons which fastened the lace in
the collar of her dainty gown. Again it was Gay who spoke first.

"Doesn't it seem queer to think of Allison's being engaged? It is such a
little while since we were all school girls together. Nobody knows whose
turn will come next. It makes me feel like a soldier on a battle
field--comrades being shot down all around you right and left and you
never knowing how soon it'll be your turn to fall. It's awful! Lloyd,
what's become of that boy out in Arizona, the one who sent you those
orange-blossoms in Joyce's letter when I was here before? He was best
man at Eugenia Forbes' wedding."

"Oh, you mean Phil Tremont!" answered Lloyd placidly, without the
conscious blush that Gay had expected to see. "He is out West again,
doing splendidly, Eugenia writes."

"I thought you wrote to him yourself."

Lloyd, stooping to pick up her dress and hang it over a chair, did not
see with what keen interest Gay watched her as she questioned.

"Oh, we still keep up a sawt of hit and miss correspondence. He writes
every few weeks and I manage to reply once in two months or so. It's
dreadfully uphill work for me to write to people whom I nevah see. It's
been two yeahs since he was heah, and I nevah know what he'll be
interested in."

"I suppose it's easier writing to some one you've known all your life,
like Malcolm MacIntyre for instance. I'm so sorry he and Keith are
abroad this summer."

Lloyd's face dimpled mischievously as she began to see the drift of
Gay's questioning. "I can't tell you how easy it is to write to Malcolm,
because I've nevah done it. Now it's my turn to ask questions. Where did
you get this new photograph of Ranald Walton on yoah dressing table? Beg
it from Kitty as you did that one at Warwick Hall, when he was a little
cadet, or get it from headquartahs?"

"Direct from headquarters," confessed Gay with a laugh. "He isn't so
afraid of girls as he used to be. Wasn't he charming tonight?"

So the questioning and answering went on for quarter of an hour longer,
each anxious to find how far the other had drifted into the unexplored
country of their dreams. Then Gay blew out the candles and climbed into
the high four-posted bed beside Lloyd, where they lay looking out
through the open window into the starlight. The moon had been down for
some time. It was so still here in the heart of the beech woods that the
silence could almost be felt. The girls spoke in whispers.

"It settles down on one like a pall," said Gay. "Are you sleepy?"

"Not very," answered Lloyd, stifling a yawn.

"Then there's one more person in the valley I want to ask about. I
believe I've heard an account of every one else. Where's Rob Moore and
what is he doing? I thought he would come over with you all tonight."

"Poah old Rob," answered Lloyd, swallowing another yawn. "His fathah
died a little ovah a yeah ago, and he's nevah been like himself since.
He seemed to grow into a man in just a few hours. It was awfully
sudden--Mistah Moore's death. The shock neahly killed Rob's mothah, and
the deah old judge, his grandfathah, you know, was simply heartbroken.
Rob just gave up his entire time to them aftah that. He was such a
comfort. Nevah left the place, and took charge of all the business
mattahs, to spare them every worry. When things were settled up they
found there wasn't as much left as they had thought there would be, and
Rob wouldn't touch a cent to finish his law course. He was afraid his
mothah would have to deny herself some luxury she had always been used
to, and he didn't want her to miss a single one she had had in his
fathah's lifetime. So he took a position in Louisville, and has been
working like a dawg evah since. He reads law at night with the old
Judge, so I scarcely evah see him. We've just drifted apart, till it
seems as if the little old Bobby I grew up with is dead and gone. I
missed him dreadfully at first, all last summah, for he'd almost lived
at our house, and was just like a brothah. I haven't seen him at all
this vacation, though to be suah I've only been home this one day."

In the dim starlight Lloyd could not see the complacent smile on Gay's
face, but her voice showed that she was well pleased with the answers to
her string of questions.

"Now I'll tell you why I put you through such a catechism," she began.
"I wanted to make sure that the coast is clear, so that you can
undertake a mission that is to be laid at your door this summer.
Jameson's brother Leland will be here to-morrow afternoon. If he takes a
fancy to the place he will probably stay as long as we do, and we are
all very anxious for him to stay. He's only three years younger than
Jameson, but the two were left alone in the world when they were just
little tots, and Jameson has been like a father to him. He feels so
responsible for him and so does Lucy. I do too, now, although he's only
my brother-in-law's brother, because I persuaded them to come here for
the summer, and Jameson wanted to go somewhere where Leland would be
satisfied to stay."

"What's the mattah with him, that he needs so much looking aftah? If
he's twenty-three yeahs old it seems to me that he might take the
responsibility of himself on his own shouldahs. Is he wild?"

"No. Jameson says he's always been too high-minded to do the things men
mean when they talk about sowing their wild oats; but he is as utterly
irresponsible as a will-o-the-wisp. He won't stay tied down to
anything--just drifts around, here and there, having a good time. It's a
pity that he isn't as poor as a church mouse. Then he'd have to do
something. He's so bright he easily could make something splendid of
himself. Now Jameson has good sensible ideas about not squandering his
money, and although he doesn't have to work any more than Leland does,
he looks after the details of his own business as a man should.

"He knows all about the mines he has stock in down in Mexico, and he
studies mineralogy and labour problems and investments, and has an
office that he goes to regularly every morning. He takes after his
father's side of the house, practical English people. But Leland is like
his mother's family (they were proud old Spaniards just a generation or
so back). He is adventurous and roving and romantic, and has the _dolce
far niente_ in the blood. Jameson says that all that Leland needs is to
be kept keyed up to the right pitch, for he is so impetuous and
headstrong that he always gets what he starts after, no matter what
stands in the way; and that if he could just fall heels over head in
love with some girl with great force of character, who wouldn't look at
him till he'd measured up to her standards, it would be the making of
him."

Lloyd yawned. "Excuse me for saying it," she began teasingly, "but I
don't see how you can get up so much interest in anybody like that, even
if he is yoah brothah-in-law's brothah. It sounds to me as if he is just
plain _lazy_ and I nevah did have any use for a man that had to be
nagged all the time to keep his ambition up to high-watah mark."

Gay sat up in bed in her earnestness. "Oh Lloyd, don't say that!" she
protested. "Don't judge him till you've seen him. He's perfectly dear in
lots of ways, in spite of his faults. You'll find him fascinating.
Everybody does. And I'm going to be entirely honest with you--I've
fairly _prayed_ that you'd like him. You are so strong yourself, the
strongest character of any girl I know, and you influence people so
forcibly in spite of themselves, that I've felt from the start it would
be the making of Leland if you'd take him in hand this summer."

Lloyd smothered a laugh in the pillow. "'Why don't you speak for
yourself, John,'" she said mischievously. "Why don't _you_ take him in
hand? You are already interested so much that you'd only be combining
pleasuah with duty."

Gay was too much in earnest to tolerate any levity, and went on in her
intense eager way. "Oh I've already worn myself out trying to influence
him, but it's of no use. He knows me too well. He's called me 'Pug' and
'Red-bird' ever since we went to kindergarten together. I'm just one of
the family. But I've showed him your picture and told him what an
unapproachable, unattainable creature you are, and whetted his curiosity
till it's as keen as a razor. Oh I've played my little game like an
expert, and he doesn't suspect in the faintest degree what I want. He
thinks I'm trying to interest him in Kitty Walton. I told him she's the
darlingest, jolliest, prettiest thing in ten states, and that I'd
guarantee he wouldn't feel bored once this entire summer if he'd make
her acquaintance.

"But you--I've painted as so indifferent and entirely above his reach,
that just to prove to me I'm mistaken, he'll nearly break his neck to
put himself on good terms with you. It's just as Jameson says, he'll
ride rough-shod over everything that stands in his way, to get what he
wants."

Lloyd raised herself on her elbow and turned a protesting face towards
her eloquent bed-fellow.

"Well of all cool things," she began, half inclined to be indignant, yet
so amused at Gay's masterly management that the exclamation ended in a
giggle. "Where do _I_ come in, pray? You say he always gets what he goes
aftah. Did it evah occur to you that I might not want to be taken
possession of in that high-handed way? That _I_ might have something to
say in the mattah? Haven't you as much interest in my welfare as in
yoah sistah's husband's brothah?"

"Of course! you blessed little goose!" exclaimed Gay, giving the arm
next hers an impetuous squeeze. "Don't I know the haughty Princess well
enough to be sure that all the king's horses and all the king's men
couldn't budge her against her will? I'm not looking ahead any farther
than this summer. But if you could just shake him up and put him on his
mettle that long, that's all I ask of you. And seriously, dear, you
might go the world over and not find one who measures up to your ideals
in more ways. He's well born and talented and rich and fairly
good-looking. He's so entertaining one never tires of his company,
good-hearted and generous to a fault, and--Oh Lloyd, _please_ say you'll
take enough interest to keep him keyed up to the right pitch for awhile.
It's all he lacks to make a splendid man."

"Do you know, I think that's a mighty big lack," said Lloyd, honestly.
"I've had strings on my harp that wouldn't stay strung. It's the most
exasperating thing in the world. You know how it is, with a violin.
Right in the midst of the loveliest passages one will begin to slip
back--just a trifle, maybe, not more than a hair's breadth, but enough
to make it flat and spoil the harmony. Then you stop and tune it up
again, and go on for awhile, but back it will slip just when you've
gotten to depending on it. You know I couldn't have any respect for a
man who had to be kept up to the notch that way. It would spoil the
whole thing to have him flat on a single note when I'd depended on him
to ring clear and true."

Gay had no reply ready for this unexpected argument, and her experience
with stringed instruments made it very forcible. It was several minutes
before she answered, then she spoke triumphantly.

"But you know what a master can do where a novice would fail. He can fit
the keys to hold any position he gives them. Leland has never felt the
touch of a master-hand. No one has ever controlled him. He has always
been petted and spoiled. He has never known a girl like you. I'm sure
that if you were only willing to make the attempt to arouse his pride
and ambition, you could do wonders for him."

It was the most potent appeal Gay could have made. To feel that her
influence may sway a man to higher, better things, will make even the
most frivolous girl draw quicker breath with a sense of power, and to a
conscientious girl like Lloyd this seemed an opportunity and a
responsibility that could not be lightly thrust aside.

"Well," she said finally, after a moment of hesitation, "I'll try."

Gay reached over with an impulsive kiss. "Oh you _dear_! I knew you
would. Now I can let you go to sleep in peace. 'Something accomplished,
something done, has earned a night's repose.' It must be awfully late.
Goodnight dear."

Long after Gay had fallen asleep, Lloyd lay thinking of the mission thus
thrust upon her. If this Leland Harcourt had needed reforming, she told
herself, she wouldn't have had anything to do with him. Her poor
Violet's experience with Ned Bannon had taught her one lesson--how
mistaken any girl is who thinks she can accomplish _that_. But to be the
master-hand that could put in tune some really splendid instrument (ah,
Gay's appeal was subtle and strong) _any_ girl would be glad and proud
to be _that_: the inspiration, the power for good, the beckoning hand
that would lead a man to the noblest heights of attainment.

There was something exhilarating, uplifting in the thought, that
banished sleep. Night often brings exalted moods that seem absurd next
day. Lying there, looking out at the stars, the pleasing fancy came to
her that each one was a sacred altar-flame, given into the keeping of
some unseen vestal virgin. Now she too had joined this star-world
Sisterhood, and had lighted a vestal fire on the altar of a promise. In
its constant watch, she would keep tryst with all that Life demanded of
her.




CHAPTER III

A KNIGHT COMES RIDING


NEXT morning Lloyd found that her exalted mood had faded away with the
stars. Any fire must pale before the broad light of day, and her
vestal-maiden fervour had given place to a very lively but mundane
interest in the brother-in-law's brother.

She was glad to hear at breakfast that he liked tennis, was a good
horseman, that private theatricals were always a success when he had a
hand in them. She stored away in her memory for future use, the
information that he had lived several years in Spain and Mexico, and
spoke Spanish like a native, that unlike Jameson he was prouder of his
Castilian ancestors than his English ones, and that two of his fads were
collecting pipes and rare old ivory carvings.

[Illustration: "DREW REIN A MOMENT AT THE GATE, TO LOOK DOWN THE STATELY
AVENUE."]

The more she heard about him the less sure she felt of being able to
keep her promise to Gay. It began to seem presumptuous to her that a
mere school-girl should imagine that she could exert any influence
over such an accomplished man of the world as he evidently was. All that
day she pictured to herself at intervals how she should meet him and
what she should say. It was a new experience for the haughty Princess
who had always been so indifferent to the opinions of her boy friends.
Gay's request had made her self-conscious. Fortunately she had a glimpse
of him before he saw her, which helped her to adjust herself to the rôle
she wanted to assume.

The morning after his arrival in the Valley, he and Ranald rode past the
Locusts, and drew rein a moment at the gate, to look down the stately
avenue which was always pointed out to strangers. Lloyd watched their
approach from behind a leafy screen of lilac bushes. The gleam of a wild
strawberry had lured her over there from the path, a few minutes before.
Then the discovery of a patch of four-leaf clovers near by had tempted
her to a seat on the grass. She was arranging the long stems of the
clovers in a cluster when the sound of hoof-beats made her look up.

So thickset were the lilacs between her and the road that not a glimpse
of her white dress or the flutter of a ribbon betrayed her presence, and
they paused to admire the avenue, unknowing that a far prettier picture
was hidden away a few yards from them, in full sound of their voices--a
girl half lying in the grass, with June's own fresh charm in her glowing
face, and the sunshine throwing dappled leaf shadows over her soft fair
hair. The mischievous light in her hazel eyes deepened as she watched
them.

"'The knights come riding two by two,'" she quoted in a whisper, closely
scrutinizing the stranger.

"He rides well, anyhow," was her first thought. The next was that he
looked much older than Gay's description had led her to imagine.
Probably it was because he wore a moustache, while Rob and Malcolm and
Alex and Ranald were all smooth-shaven. Maybe it was that same black
moustache, with the gleam of white teeth and the flashing glance of his
black eyes that gave him that dashing cavalier sort of look. How
wonderfully his dark face lighted up when he smiled, and how distinctly
one recalled it when he had passed on. And yet it wasn't a handsome
face. She wondered wherein lay its charm.

Gay's words recurred to her: "So fiery and impetuous he would ride
rough-shod over anything that stood in his way to get what he wants."

"He looks it," she thought, raising her head a trifle to watch them out
of sight. "I'm afraid I can't do as much for him as Gay expects for I'll
simply not stand his putting on any of his lordly ways with _me_."
Gathering up her clovers, she started back to the house, her head held
high unconsciously, in her most Princess-like pose.

Some one else had watched the passing of the two young men on horseback.
From his arm chair on the white pillared porch, old Colonel Lloyd
reached out to the wicker table beside him for his field-glass, to focus
it on the distant entrance gate.

"I don't seem to place them," he said aloud. "It looks like young Walton
on the roan, but the other one is a stranger in these parts."

Then as he saw they were not coming in, he shifted the glass to other
objects. Slowly his gaze swept the landscape from side to side, till it
rested on Lloyd, sitting on the grass by the lilac thicket, sorting her
lapful of clovers.

Something in her childish occupation and the sunny gleam of the proud
little head bowed intently over her task, recalled another scene to the
old Colonel; that morning when through this same glass he had watched
her first entrance into Locust. Was it fourteen or fifteen years ago? It
seemed only yesterday that he had found her near that same spot coolly
feeding his choicest strawberries to an elfish looking dog. Time had
gone so fast since his imperious little grand-daughter had come into his
life to fill it with new interests and deeper meaning. Yes, it certainly
seemed no longer ago than yesterday that she was tyrannizing over him in
her adorable baby fashion, making an abject slave of him, whom every one
else feared. And now here she was coming towards him across the lawn, a
tall, fair girl in the last summer of her teens. Why Amanthis was no
older than she when he had brought her home to Locust, a bride. And no
doubt some one would be coming soon, wanting to carry away Lloyd, the
light of his eyes and the life of the place.

It made him angry to think of it, and when she stopped beside his chair
to give him a soft pat on the cheek her first remark sent a jealous
twinge through him.

"So _that's_ who the stranger was with young Walton," he responded.
"_Humph!_ I don't think much of him."

"But grandfathah, how could you tell at such a distance?" laughed Lloyd.
"It isn't fair to form an opinion at such long range. You'd bettah come
with us tonight again ovah to the Cabin, and make his acquaintance.
There's to be anothah housewahming, especially for him. Kitty and Ranald
are engineering it. They've invited all the young people in the
neighbourhood--sawt of a surprise you know. At least they call it that,
although Gay and Lucy are expecting us. Even Rob is going, for Kitty
waylaid him as he got off the train yestahday evening, and talked him
into consenting."

"I'm glad of that," answered the old Colonel heartily. "'All work and no
play makes Jack a dull boy.' This last year has been hard on the lad.
The Judge tells me he's never left the place a single night since his
Daddy died. He just grinds along in that hardware store all day, and is
into his law books as soon as he gets home. He's getting to be an old
man before his time. I'm glad your little friend Gay is here this
summer, on his account, if for no other reason. She'll draw him out of
his shell if anybody can. I remember how much he seemed to be taken with
her that Christmas Vacation she spent in the Valley."

Lloyd gaped at him in astonishment. "Why grandfathah! I nevah dreamed
that you noticed things like _that_!"

"I certainly do, my dear," he answered playfully. "I was young myself
once upon a time. It's easy to recognize familiar landmarks on a road
you've travelled. But why," he said suddenly in a changed tone, "if I
may be so bold as to ask, _why_ is this young Texan to be ushered into
the valley with this blare of trumpets and torchlight effect? Is he
anything out of the ordinary?"

"No, but it will make him feel that he hasn't dropped down into a poky
inland village with nothing doing, but into a lovely social whirl
instead. They want him to be so pleased with the place that he'll be
satisfied to stay all summah."

It was almost on the tip of her tongue to tell why his family were so
desirous of keeping him with them, but another scornful "_humph!_"
checked her. For some unaccountable reason the old Colonel seemed to
have taken a dislike to this stranger, and she knew that this
information would deepen it to such an extent, that he would not want
her to have anything to do with him.

"He'd be furious if he knew what I promised Gay," she thought, "for he
takes such violent prejudices that the least thing 'adds fuel to the
flame.' He might not want me to let him call heah or anything."

"What do you keep saying '_humph!_' to me foh?" she asked saucily,
"when I'm trying to tell you the news and am so kind and polite as to
ask you to go to the pahty with us. It's dreadful to have such an old
ogah of a grandfathah, who makes you shake in yoah shoes every time he
opens his mouth."

Her arm was round his neck as she spoke, and her cheek pressed against
his. The caress drove away every other thought save that it was good to
have his little Colonel home again, and he gave a pleased chuckle as she
went on scolding him in a playful manner that no one else in the world
ever dared assume with him. But all the while that she was twisting his
white moustache, and braiding his Napoleon-like goatee into a funny
little tail, she was thinking about the evening, and the indifferent air
with which she intended to meet Leland Harcourt. She would have to be
indifferent, and oblivious of his existence as far as she could
politely, because Gay had told him that she was unapproachable and
unattainable. She would talk to Rob most of the evening, she decided.
She was glad that she would have the opportunity, for she had not seen
him since coming home. He had called at The Locusts the night after her
return from school, but that was the night she had stayed at the Cabin
with Gay, and she had missed him.

"Did you know that your trunks came while you were at the post-office?"
asked the Colonel presently. Owing to some mistake in checking their
baggage in Washington, Lloyd's trunks had been delayed, and she had been
wearing some of Betty's clothes the two days she had been at home.

"Why didn't you tell me soonah?" she asked, springing up from her seat
on the arm of his chair. "I've been puzzling my brains all mawning ovah
what I could weah tonight." Hastily gathering up the handful of clovers
that she had dropped on the wicker table, she ran upstairs. Everything
in her pink bower of a room was in confusion. Her Commencement gown lay
on the bed like an armful of thistledown, with her gloves and lace fan
beside it. On the mantel stood the little white slippers in which she
had tripped across the rostrum at Warwick Hall to receive her diploma
from Madam Chartley's hands. Now the diploma with its imposing red seals
and big blue satin bow, was reposing on top of the clock on the same
mantel with the slippers, and from the open trunks which Mom Beck was
unpacking, a motley collection of books, clothing, sorority banners and
school-girl souvenirs flowed out all over the floor.

The old coloured woman was garrulous this morning. Her trip to
Washington "with all her white folks, to her baby's Finishment" (she
couldn't understand why it should be called Commencement), had been the
event of her life; and when she could get no one else to listen, she
talked to herself, recounting each incident of her journey with unctuous
enjoyment.

She was on her knees now before one of the trunks, talking so earnestly
into its depths, that Lloyd, entering the room, looked around to see who
her audience could be. At the sound of Lloyd's step the monologue came
to a sudden stop, and the wrinkled old face turned with a smile.

"What you want me to do with all these yeah school books, honey, now you
done with 'em fo' evah?"

"Mercy, Mom Beck! don't talk as if I had come to the end of every thing,
and am too old to study any moah! I expect to keep up my French and
German all next wintah, even if I am a débutante. Don't you remembah
what Madam Chartley said in her lovely farewell speech to the
graduating class? What's the good of taking you to Commencement, if
that's all the impression it made?"

A pleased cackle of a laugh answered her. "Law, honey, I couldn't listen
to speeches! I was too busy thinkin' of Becky Potah in her black silk
dress that ole Cun'l give me for the grand occasion, an' the purple
pansies in my bonnet. The queen o' Sheby couldn't held a can'le to me
_that_ day."

She was off on another chapter of reminiscences now, but Lloyd paid no
attention. As she picked up the books and found places for them on the
low shelves that filled one side of the room, she felt as if she were
assisting at the last sad rites of something very dear; for each page
was eloquent with happy memories of her last year at school. Every
scribbled margin recalled some pleasant recitation hour, and most of the
fly-leaves were decorated by Kitty's ridiculous caricatures. She and
Kitty had been room-mates this last year.

In order to find place for these books, which she had just brought home,
she had to carry a row of old ones down to the library. They were
juvenile tales, most of them, which she laid aside; girls' stories that
had once been a never failing source of delight. She could remember the
time (and not so very long ago, either) when it had seemed impossible
that she could out-grow them. And now as she trailed down stairs with an
armful of her old favourites, she felt as if the shadowy figure of her
childhood, the little Lloyd that used to be, followed her with
reproachful glances for her disloyalty to these discarded friends.

On her way back to her room for a second armful, she stopped outside
Betty's door for a moment, hoping to hear some noise within, which would
indicate that Betty was not at her desk. There was so much that she
wanted to talk to her about. One of the things she had looked forward to
most eagerly in her home-coming was the long, sisterly talks they would
have together. Now it was a disappointment to find her so absorbed in
her writing that she was as inaccessible as if she had withdrawn into a
cloister.

"I'll be glad when the old book is finished," thought Lloyd impatiently
as she tip-toed away from the door. To her, Betty's ability to write was
a mysterious and wonderful gift. Not for anything would she have
interrupted her when "genius burned," but she resented the fact that it
should rise between them as it had done lately. Even when Betty was not
shut up in her room actually at work, her thoughts seemed to be on it.
She was living in a world of her own creating, more interested in the
characters of her fancy than those who sat at table with her. Since
beginning the last chapter she had been so preoccupied and
absent-minded, that Lloyd hardly knew her. She was so unlike the old
Betty, the sympathetic confidante and counsellor, who had been
interested in even the smallest of her griefs and joys.

If Lloyd could have looked on the other side of the closed door just
then, the expression on Betty's face would have banished every feeling
of impatience or resentment, and sent her quietly away to wait and
wonder, while Betty passed through one of the great hours of her life.

With a tense, earnest face bent over the manuscript, she reached the
climax of her story--the last page, the last paragraph. Then with a
throbbing heart, she halted a moment, pen in hand, before adding the
words, _The End_. She wrote them slowly, reverently almost, and then
realizing that the ambition of her life had been accomplished, looked up
with an expression of child-like awe in her brown eyes. It was done at
last, the work that she had pledged herself to do so long ago, back
there in the little old wooden church at the Cuckoo's Nest.

For a time she forgot the luxurious room where she sat, and was back at
the beginning of her ambition and high resolves, in that plain old
meeting house in the grove of cedars. Again she tiptoed down the empty
aisle, that was as still as a tomb, save for the buzzing of a wasp at
the open window through which she had climbed. Again she opened the
little red book-case above the back pew, that held the remnants of a
scattered Sunday-school library. The queer musty smell of the
time-yellowed volumes floated out to her as strong as ever, mingling
with the warm spicy scent of pinks and cedar, from the graveyard just
outside the open window.

Those tattered books, read in secret to Davy on sunny summer afternoons,
had been the first voices to whisper to her that she too was destined to
leave a record behind her. And now that she had done it, they seemed to
call her back to that starting place. Sitting there in happy reverie,
she wished that she could make a pilgrimage back to the little church.
She would like to slip down its narrow aisle just when the afternoon sun
was shining yellowest on its worn benches and old altar, and dropping on
her knees as she had done years ago in a transport of gratitude, whisper
a happy "Thank you, God" from the depths of a glad little heart.

Presently the whisper did go up from her desk where she sat with her
face in her hands. Then reaching out for the last volume of the white
and gold series that chronicled her good times, she opened it to where a
blotter kept the place at a half written page, and added this entry.

"June 20th. Truly a red-letter day, for hereon endeth my story of
'_Aberdeen Hall_.' The book is written at last. Two chapters are still
to be copied on the typewriter, but the 'web' itself is woven, and ready
to be cut from the loom. I am glad now that I waited; that I did not
attempt to publish anything in my teens. The world looks very different
to me now at twenty. I have outgrown my early opinions and ideals with
my short dresses, just as Mrs. Walton said we would. Now the critics can
say 'Thou waitedst till thy woman's fingers wrought the best that lay
within thy woman's heart.' I can say honestly I have put the very best
of me into it, and the feeling of satisfaction that I have accomplished
the one great thing I started out to do so many years ago, gives me more
happiness I am sure, than any 'diamond leaf' that any prince could
bring."

Such elation as was Betty's that hour, seldom comes to one more than
once in a life-time. Years afterward her busy pen produced far worthier
books, which were beloved and bethumbed in thousands of libraries, but
none of them ever brought again that keen inward thrill, that wave of
intense happiness which surged through her warm and sweet, as she sat
looking down on that first completed manuscript. She was loath to lay it
aside, for the joy of the creator possessed her, and in the first flush
of pleased surveyal of her handiwork, she humbly called it good.

She went down to lunch in such an uplifted frame of mind that she seemed
to be walking on air. But Betty was always quiet, even in her most
intense moments. Save for the brilliant colour in her cheeks and the
unusual light in her eyes there was no sign of her inward excitement.
She slipped into her seat at table with the careless announcement "Well,
it's finished."

It was Lloyd who made all the demonstration amid the family
congratulations. Waving her napkin with one hand and clicking two spoons
together like castanets, she sprang from her chair and rushed around the
table to give vent to her pleasure by throwing her arms around Betty in
a delighted embrace.

"Oh you little mouse!" she cried. "How can you sit there taking it so
calmly? If I had done such an amazing thing as to write a book, I'd have
slidden down the ban'istahs with a whoop, to announce it, and come
walking in on my hands instead of my feet.

"Of co'se I'm just as proud of it as the rest of the family are," she
added when she had expended her enthusiasm and gone back to her seat,
"but now that it's done I'll confess that I've been jealous of that old
book evah since I came home, and I'm mighty glad it's out of the way.
Now you'll have time to take some interest in what the rest of us are
doing, and you'll feel free to go in, full-swing, for the celebration at
the Cabin tonight."

All the rest of that day seemed a fête day to Betty. Her inward glow
lent a zest to the doing of even the most trivial things, and she
prepared for the gaieties at the Cabin, as if it were her own
entertainment, pleased that this red-letter occasion of her life should
be marked by some kind of a celebration. It was to do honour to the day
and not to the Harcourt's guest, that she arrayed herself in her most
becoming gown.

Rob dropped in early, quite in the old way as if there had never been a
cessation of his daily visits, announcing that he had come to escort the
girls to the Cabin. Lloyd who was not quite ready, leaned over the
banister in the upper hall for a glimpse of her old playmate, intending
to call down some word of greeting; but he looked so grave and dignified
as he came forward under the hall chandelier to shake hands with Betty,
that she drew back in silence.

The next instant she resented this new feeling of reserve that seemed to
rise up and wipe out all their years of early comradery. Why shouldn't
she call down to him over the banister as she had always done? she asked
herself defiantly. He was still the same old Rob, even if he had grown
stern and grave looking. She leaned over again, but this time it was the
sight of Betty that stopped her. She had never seen her so beaming, so
positively radiant. In that filmy yellow dress, she might have posed as
the Daffodil Maid. Her cheeks were still flushed, her velvety brown eyes
luminous with the joy of the day's achievement.

Lloyd watched her a moment in fascinated admiration, as she stood
laughing and talking under the hall light. Then she saw that Rob was
just as much impressed with Betty's attractiveness as she was, and was
looking at her as if he had made a discovery.

His pleased glance and the frank compliment that followed sent a thought
into Lloyd's mind that made her wonder why it had never occurred to her
before. How well Betty would fit into the establishment over at Oaklea.
What a dear daughter she would make to Mrs. Moore, and what a joy she
would be to the old Judge! Rob seemed to be finding her immensely
entertaining. Well, there was no need for her to hurry down now. She
could take her time about changing her dress.

Lloyd could not have told what had made her decide so suddenly that her
dress needed changing. She had put on a pale green dimity that she liked
because it was simple and cool-looking, but now after a glance into the
mirror she began to slip it off.

"It looks like a wilted lettuce leaf," she said petulantly to her
reflection, realizing that nothing but white could hold its own when
brought in contact with Betty's gown. That pale exquisite shade of
glowing yellow would be the dominating colour in any place it might be
worn.

"I must live up to Gay's expectations," she thought, "so white it shall
be, Señor Harcourt!"

His dark face with its flashing smile rose before her, and stayed in the
foreground of her thoughts, all the time she was arraying herself in her
daintiest, fluffiest white organdy. Clasping the little necklace of
Roman pearls around her throat, and catching up her lace fan, she swept
up to the mirror for a last anxious survey. It was a thoroughly
satisfactory one, and with a final smoothing of ribbons she smiled over
her shoulder at the charming reflection.

"Now I'll go down and practise my airs and graces on Rob and Betty for
awhile. But I'll leave them in peace after we get to the Cabin, for if
there should be any possibility of their beginning to care for each
othah, I wouldn't get in the way for worlds. Now _this_ is the way I'll
sail in to meet Mistah Harcourt!"

Thus it happened that the hauteur with which she intended to impress him
was in her manner when she swept in to greet Rob. It was not meant for
Rob but it had the same effect as if it were, making him feel as if she
wished to drop the friendly familiarity of their school days, and meet
him on the footing of a recent acquaintance. He had been looking forward
all year to her home-coming, and now it gave him a vague sense of
disappointment and injury, that she should be as conventionally
gracious to him as if he were the veriest stranger. His eyes followed
her wistfully, as if looking for something very precious which he had
lost.

Wholly unconscious of the way she was spoiling the evening for him Lloyd
went on playing the part of Serene Highness, laid out for her. Never to
Gay's admiring eyes had she seemed more beautiful, more the fair
unattainable Princess, than she was in her meeting with Leland Harcourt.
Gay wanted to pat her on the back, for she saw that she had made the
very impression expected of her. Long practice had made Gay quick in
interpreting Leland's slightest change of expression, and she was well
pleased now with what she read in his face.

But to Lloyd, the dark, smiling eyes, regarding everything with a
slightly amused expression, showed nothing more than the superficial
interest which ordinary politeness demanded of him. He made some pretty
speech about the Valley and his pleasure in meeting its charming people,
and then stood talking only long enough to make her feel that Gay was
right in her estimate of him. He was entertaining, even fascinating in
his manner, more entertaining than any man she had ever met. But just as
she reached this conclusion she found herself handed over in some
unaccountable way to some one else, and that was the last of his
attention to her that night.

He seemed immensely entertained by Kitty, and much interested in Betty
and the fact that she had finished writing a book that very day. Gay
heralded her advent with that news. Lloyd could overhear little scraps
of conversation that made her long to have a share in it. His repartee
was positively brilliant she found herself thinking; the kind that one
reads of in books, but never hears elsewhere.

For the first time in her life Lloyd felt herself calmly and
deliberately ignored, just as she had planned to ignore him.

"Maybe it's because Gay told him that I would be so indifferent," she
thought, "and he doesn't think it worth the effort to put himself out to
make me be nice to him. I don't care."

Nevertheless a little feeling of disappointment and pique crept in to
spoil her evening also, for in the limited wisdom of her school-girl
experiences she did not recognize that this worldly-wise young man was
ignoring her because he was interested; that he had only adopted her own
tactics as the surest way of gaining his end.




CHAPTER IV

BETTY'S NOVEL


IT was Gay's voice over the telephone. "Oh Lloyd, _can't_ you come? Do
arrange it some way. Lucy is frightened stiff at the thought of being
left here alone all night with just me. And she thought it would be such
a good time for Betty to read us her novel, as she promised, before she
sends it away to the publishers. There'll be no callers to interrupt us
on such a rainy day."

"Hold the phone a minute," answered Lloyd. "I'll see. It's Gay," she
explained to her mother who had come out into the hall at the first
tinkle of the bell, thinking the summons might be for her.

"Mistah Harcourt and his brothah went to Lexington this mawning to buy
those hawses, and Gay and Lucy are afraid to stay there tonight. The
cook had promised to sleep at the house, but something turned up at her
home a little while ago to prevent. So they want Kitty and Betty and me
to come ovah right away and spend the aftahnoon and night. It's raining
cataracts and I know you don't like to take the new carriage out in such
weathah, but couldn't Alec put the curtains on the old one?"

Mrs. Sherman glanced dubiously towards the windows, against which the
rain was beating in torrents.

"And leave me all alone, when I've been looking forward to this same
good, rainy afternoon with you," almost slipped from Mrs. Sherman's
tongue. But the eager desire shining in the faces of both girls kept
back the words.

"It's only a warm summer rain," interposed Betty, seeing her hesitate.

"Very well, then," consented Mrs. Sherman with a smile, but as she went
back to her room she stifled a little sigh of disappointment. "I suppose
it's only natural they should want to be going," she thought. "But if it
wasn't so selfish I could almost wish that Gay hadn't come to the Valley
for the summer. She will take Lloyd away from home so often, and I have
looked forward so long to the companion she would be when her school
days were ended."

Wholly unconscious of her mother's disappointment Lloyd was answering
merrily, "We'll be ovah right away! Ring up Kitty again, and tell her
we'll drive by for her."

An hour later the five girls (for the bride of a year seemed the
youngest of them all at times) were seated in an upstairs room at the
Lindsey Cabin, each in a comfortable rocking chair. Lucy had taken them
to her room saying it was cozier up near the roof where they could hear
the rain patter on the shingles. Also her dormer windows faced the West,
and they would have daylight longer there.

It took a little while for them to get settled for the reading. Lucy
brought out the family darning with a matronly air, when she saw that
Lloyd had brought a square of linen to start a piece of drawn-work, and
Kitty had some napkins to hem. Mrs. Walton had turned over the
management of the house to Kitty only that day (Allison had had it the
year before) and with house-wifely zeal she had begun with an
exploration of the linen closet where she had found a pile of unhemmed
linen.

Not wanting to be idle while all the rest were occupied, Gay kept them
waiting while she burrowed through her trunk for an intricate piece of
knitting work which she had begun two years before. It had been
intended for a Christmas present, and she had brought it with her
intending to finish it before another Christmas or perish in the
attempt. "Don't pay any attention to me," she warned. "There'll be
places where I have to stop and count stitches and fairly wrestle with
it, but I'll be listening in spite of my bodily contortions."

They were all ready at last, so Betty picked up the first chapter and
cleared her throat. She had been anxious to read her novel to the girls,
she had been so sure of its merit. But now as she glanced down the page
she was assailed by misgivings. After all she might not have been an
impartial judge, and maybe it wasn't as good as it seemed to her.

"You'll recognize some of the incidents," she explained, "and one
character is a composite portrait of three Lloydsboro people. He looks
like Mr. Jaynes, stutters like Captain Bedel and has experiences that
once happened to Doctor Shelby. I've put Miss Marietta Waring's romance
into it too."

Betty read well. She loved the characters she had fashioned, and with
her sympathetic voice to interpret them, they became almost as real to
her listeners as they were to herself. Presently the girls began to
exchange approving nods. She watched them from the corner of her eye.
Now and then there were low murmurs of approbation at some particularly
pleasing incident or turn of expression, and at the end of the first
chapter there was outspoken applause. They complimented enthusiastically
while Betty rested and took breath for the next.

As she felt the genuine pleasure she was affording them, all her fears
as to its short-comings fled. She began to see that her story was even
better than she had thought it. She saw it in better perspective through
their eyes. Its plot moved so smoothly. There was more life, more _go_
in it than she had been conscious of in her solitary readings. It was
certainly worth all the painstaking effort it had cost her. She could
look at it now and no longer humbly, but confidently call it good.

When in one scene she stole a furtive glance around to note the effect,
and caught Lucy stealthily slipping out her handkerchief, Gay looking up
with tears on her lashes and Lloyd with the peculiar tightening of the
lips that showed she was trying to swallow the lump in her throat, she
was so happy she could have sung for joy. She read on and on, and they
forgot the rain beating against the windows, forgot everything but
their interest in the story.

Lucy pushed her darning basket aside and leaned back in her chair, her
hands clasped behind her head. The work over which Lloyd had been
bending, dropped in her lap and her little gold thimble rolled away into
a corner unheeded. There was a personal interest in the story for each
of them. Lloyd saw herself as plainly in Betty's heroine as she could
see her reflection in the mirror door of the huge mahogany wardrobe
opposite her. Some of Kitty's ridiculous speeches that had become
historical in her family, found a place here and there, and once Lucy
laughed outright, exclaiming, "Why that's just like Gay! You must have
been thinking of her when you wrote it."

The reading went on without interruption until it was so dark that Betty
had to hold her manuscript close to the window. "I'll ring for lights,"
thought Lucy, "just as soon as she comes to the end of this chapter."
But with the end of the chapter came Ca'line Allison with a message from
the kitchen. Lucy started up in dismay.

"There! I forgot all about that salad. How could I be so careless when
I'm to have a real live authoress to dinner? I was so interested I
hadn't a thought for anything but the story."

"Such appreciation is a thousand times better than salad," laughed
Betty, so jubilant over her triumph that her eyes were full of a happy
light. "This is a good place to stop until after dinner. I've read until
my throat is tired."

Lucy hurried down stairs to hasten the dinner preparations, in order
that they might get back to the reading as soon as possible. The four
girls folded their work, and sat in the twilight, talking.

"What does this make you think of?" asked Lloyd.

"I know what's in your mind," answered Kitty. "I was just about to speak
of it myself; that rainy day at Boarding School, when Ida Shane read
'The Fortune of Daisy Dale' to us, behind locked doors. Wasn't it
thrilling?"

Gay who had heard the incident mentioned many times at Warwick Hall,
said plaintively, "You girls always make me feel that I have missed half
my life, because I wasn't with you when Ida Shane read that story. I'd
certainly like to get my hands on such a wonderful piece of literature."

"But it wasn't wonderful," Betty hastened to explain. "It made that deep
impression on us simply because it was the first novel we had ever
read. It was sentimental and melodramatic and trashy as we've since
discovered, but then it seemed all that was lovely and romantic. It gave
us thrills up and down our spines and sent us around with our heads in
the clouds for days. We were seeing embryo Guy Wolverings in every boy
we met. As I listened to Ida I thought that if I could only write a book
that would hold my listeners spellbound as that held us, I'd ask no more
of life. I could die happy."

"Well, you've done it, dear," said Gay warmly. "We scarcely breathed
during the last two chapters, and I'm so eager to know how it ends that
I'd willingly cut dinner to go on with it."

"Now how does that make you feel, Miss Elizabeth Lloyd Lewis?" asked
Kitty teasingly. "Fair uplifted, I've nae doot."

"Yes, it does," was the honest answer. "It's what I've hoped for and
worked for and prayed for these last ten years. Can you wonder that it
makes me radiantly happy to have you girls think that I have in a
measure succeeded?"

Dinner was announced a little later, and when the girls went into the
dining-room, they found Lucy herself bringing it in.

"Poor Sylvia had another message from home," she explained, "so I told
her and Ca'line Allison to go on; that we'd wait on ourselves and clear
the table, and they could wash the dishes in the morning. It's not
raining quite so hard now, but it is dark as a pocket outside."

As she placed the soup tureen on the table, they heard the outer kitchen
door close, and Sylvia turn the key in the lock.

"Ugh!" exclaimed Lucy with a shiver. "Now we're abandoned to our fate! I
wish you'd pull that window-shade farther down, Gay. There's just room
for somebody to peep under it, and there's nothing more terrifying to me
than the thought of eyes peering in at one from the outer darkness."

"'The gobelins will git you if you don't watch out,'" sang Gay. "Do for
pity's sake put your mind on something else, Lucy, and don't spoil this
festive occasion with a case of high jinks!"

Seeing that their little hostess was really nervous and timid, Kitty
began to divert them all by impersonating different characters in the
Valley. She was a fine mimic, and kept them laughing all through the
first course. Lucy carried out the plates, and hurried back with the
second course.

"You've got to get the salad when the time comes," she said to Gay.
"It's so spooky out there in the kitchen with Sylvia gone, that I was
afraid to look over my shoulder. Queer, isn't it! For it's just as warm
and well-lighted and cheerful now as when she was there. I wouldn't go
into the pantry alone for a fortune."

"Nonsense!" cried Kitty. "Five valiant females are enough to keep any
Lloydsboro foe at bay. We'll be your brave defenders."

Gay, who had risen to circle around the table with a plate of hot
biscuit, paused dramatically beside Lucy's chair to say in a stage
whisper, "Hist! I have a weapon of defence ye wot not of. One that a
doughty knight did leave behind him."

"Oh," said the literal Lucy. "I suppose you mean Mr. Shelby's
boxing-glove that he left on the piano, when he came in yesterday to
bring you those books. It was awfully funny, girls, the way he _seemed_
to leave it by accident. I couldn't help laughing, for it was so evident
he did it on purpose, to have an excuse to come again sooner than he
would have done otherwise."

Gay smiled knowingly. It was not a boxing-glove she meant, but for
reasons of her own she did not enlighten Lucy as to the kind of weapon
she had in reserve. It was after eight when they rose from the table,
and they made such a frolic of carrying out the dishes, that the
grandfather clock on the stairs chimed the half-hour as they finished.

Before Ca'line Allison left she had started a cheerful blaze in the
fireplace of the huge living room, for the night was chilly as well as
damp. But Lucy partly covered it with ashes, and proposed spending the
evening up-stairs.

"Somehow one feels so much safer up-stairs when there are no men in the
house," she explained. "We'll light two big lamps, and that will make it
as warm and cosy as if we had a fire."

So in a body they made the rounds of the down-stairs rooms, bolting
windows and locking doors. Then satisfied that every entrance was
securely fastened, they went up-stairs to resume the reading. This time
there was no attempt to do any needlework. With folded hands they waited
in expectant silence, while Betty found her place. But just as she
raised the sheet of paper, the great door of the mahogany wardrobe swung
slowly and stealthily open. Not a sound did it make, and there was
something so ghostly in its silent undoing that Lucy gave a little
shriek and hid her face in her hands. Each one of them acknowledged to
a queer chilly sensation just for an instant, even Gay, who explained
that it was only a little habit that the wardrobe had. "I don't mind it
in the day-time," she added, "but it _is_ spooky at night when
everything is still to have it unexpectedly pop open, and swing out with
that slow gliding motion."

"It's because the latch is worn and the catch works loose," said
matter-of-fact Kitty, who had crossed the room to examine it. She turned
the key. "Now it will not interrupt us for awhile. Go on with the story,
Betty."

Again the manuscript was raised and again Lucy stopped her with the
wail, "Oh, Gay! We've forgotten to bring up the silver pitcher and
Jameson's ladle. I put them on the dining-room table after I'd washed
them, and then marched off and forgot them."

"Well, I'll go down for them," volunteered Gay. "There's no use in your
doing it and getting another fit of shivers."

The other three sprang up, but Gay waved Betty back.

"Save your breath for the reading. Kitty and Lloyd will be enough. I
don't mind acknowledging that I'll be glad to have both a rear and a
vanguard going through that dark hall."

Lighting a candle and holding it high above her head, Lloyd led the way
down-stairs. Gay was inwardly quaking, for she was almost as timid as
her sister, but the fearlessness of her two companions made her keep up
a pretence of bravery. As the three pairs of little heels clattered down
the dark polished steps, Lloyd and Kitty kept time in a singsong chant:

    "There was a man and he had naught
     And robbers came to rob him.
     He got up on the chimney top
     And then they thought they had him.
     But he got down on the other side
     And then they couldn't find him
     He went _fourteen miles in fifteen days_
     And never looked behind him."

It was almost cruel of Kitty to seize that opportunity to tell the
scariest burglar tale that she had ever heard, but a fine appreciation
of dramatic situations urged her to it.

"Ugh! Don't!" begged Gay, as they filed into the dining-room and began
looking around for the silver heirlooms. Lucy was mistaken. It was the
kitchen table on which she had left them.

"The goose-flesh is standing out all over me! That's the most gruesome
tale I ever heard."

"But I'm in the most interesting part," insisted Kitty. "When she saw
the black face leering over the transom--"

"Hush!" chattered Gay. "I won't listen to another word. It's so creepy I
can feel things grabbing at my ankles. Let me have the candle a minute,
please, Lloyd, I want to get something out of the hat-rack drawer."

There was a faint glow on the hearth from the few embers Lucy had left
uncovered, and the two stood within it as they waited for Gay to come
back with the candle. Kitty went on with her tale, for Lloyd was as
fearless as herself. She did not get further than a sentence or two,
however, before Gay came hurrying back. To their astonishment she blew
out the candle as she reached them, and in the brief glimpse they had of
her face they saw that it was ghastly white. In the dim glow of the
embers they were scarcely visible to each other. She clutched them with
trembling fingers.

"There's some one prowling around the house!" she whispered. "Some one
was creeping around under the windows, and then up on the porch. I
heard them plain as day. I blew out the light so they couldn't see in!"

"Pooh!" began Lloyd, but enough of Gay's excitement had been
communicated to both her listeners to make their hearts thump a little
faster, when they, too, heard a noise at the window. There certainly
were steps on the porch. Then the knocker on the front door was lifted
and a hollow clang echoed through the hall.

"Burglars don't knock," said Lloyd with a sigh of relief. "Let's all go
to the doah togethah and ask who's there. We needn't open it."

"No, don't!" begged Gay, almost in tears. "It's just like that awful
story Kitty started to tell--the knock at the door, the lone woman's
voice answering, and the burglar forcing his way over the transom! Our
only safety is in keeping perfectly still. If worst comes to worst,
_then_ I'll make them think there's a man in the house, but I won't do
it till I'm driven to it."

"If it's one of the neighbours he'll knock again," said Kitty.

For a moment they waited, their hearts in their mouths, as they
remembered what a lonely place was this dark beech woods, and how near
it was to Stumptown, with its many drunken negroes. The knock was not
repeated, but the steps sounded as if the intruder were prowling back
and forth on the porch. Then the slats of the window-shutters turned
stealthily.

"Thank heaven the shades are down!" chattered Gay hysterically. "Oh,
girls, I'm growing gray-headed. I can't stand this suspense another
second." Then as the steps once more crossed the porch, "Cut up-stairs!
Quick! Both of you! I'll follow."

She darted out of the dim circle of light on the hearth, and they could
not see what happened, but almost instantly a pistol shot rang out. Up
till that moment neither Kitty nor Lloyd had been much alarmed. Now they
clutched each other wildly.

"It's some crazy man escaped from the Lakeland asylum," began Kitty, but
her words were cut short by another shot, then another and another and
another, in such rapid succession that they lost count. A series of
piercing screams from Lucy, up-stairs, made their blood run cold, but
the shrieks were not half as terrifying as the sight of Gay staggering
back out of the hall. As they sprang towards her she leaned against them
limply.

"Is she shot?" gasped Kitty in a horrified whisper. "Oh, _where's_ the
light?"

With shaking hands Lloyd caught up the daily paper, left lying on the
settle, and threw it on the coals. It blazed up instantly, and by its
light she found the candle.

The shrieks were still going on up-stairs and Betty was calling out
frantically to know what was the matter. She could not come down to see
for herself, for Lucy had caught her in a hysterical grasp and was
holding her like a vise. As the candle flared up something fell from
Gay's nerveless hand to the floor. The girls looked at each other in
blank astonishment. It was a revolver. Gay herself had fired the shots.

Now in the midst of their bewilderment they became conscious of shouts
outside. Some one was calling: "Mrs. Harcourt! Miss Melville! Don't be
alarmed! It's only Alex Shelby!"

Recognizing the voice, Lloyd flew to open the door, candle in hand.

"Oh, you gave us such a scare!" she began in a tone of relief. "We
thought it was a burglar doing the shooting. We nevah dreamed that _Gay_
had a revolvah."

"It was mine," explained Alex, laughing so that he could hardly close
his umbrella. "I loaded it for her and loaned it to her yesterday, but I
had no idea it would come back at me in that boomerang fashion. She
popped loose and shot at me bang through the front door. The first shot
whistled just over my head, and if I hadn't dodged behind a post I
surely would have stopped them all. Hottest welcome I ever had."

Then as he came on in, he continued, apologetically, "I'm mighty sorry I
gave you all such a fright. I ought to have gone away without knocking
when I saw there was no light down-stairs, but I knew you were all here,
and it was so early, I never dreamed of being taken for a burglar."

He kept on with his apologies after he came into the hall, but Gay was
not there to hear. Mortified that she had been so rash, and horrified by
the thought of how serious the consequences of her wild shooting might
have been, she could not face him. At the first sound of his voice she
ran for the stairs, her wild dash almost upsetting Lucy and Betty on
their way down. When repeated callings failed to bring her back, Kitty
went up to look for her and found her in a woebegone heap on the foot of
her bed.

"Oh, you mustn't take it to heart that way," she said soothingly, in
response to Gay's tearful protests that she could never look him in the
face again, never, _never_! That he'd always think what a fool she was
and how near she came to killing him.

"Nonsense!" was Kitty's brisk answer. "He insists that it is all his own
fault, that he ought to have known what to expect when he called on a
native Texan. He says he's always heard that they punctuate their
remarks with bullets and will shoot at the drop of a hat. Hereafter he
will herald his approach by telephone or else come in a coat of mail
warranted to turn even the fire of a Gatling gun. He's making a joke of
it, and it's silly of you not to do the same. Get up this minute and
come down-stairs, and make him have such a good time that he'll gladly
risk another shooting to come again."

[Illustration: "HE WAS BENDING ANXIOUSLY OVER A BUBBLING SAUCEPAN."]

It was a long time before Gay could screw her courage to the point of
following Kitty meekly down-stairs, and in the meantime Lucy took an
effective way to make him forget his inhospitable reception. Her chafing
dish was her panacea for many ills. She had tried it at the Post too
many times with the different boys who flocked there, not to know its
full value. So when Gay came into the room she found Alex already
being initiated into the mysteries of candy-making. With a white apron
tied around his waist, and a big spoon in his hand, he was bending
anxiously over a bubbling sauce-pan.

Heretofore his calls at the Cabin had been of the most formal kind; but
this little escapade was doing more to further their acquaintance and
put him on the same privileged footing that the boys at the Post
enjoyed, than dozens of casual meetings could have done. It was a novel
experience to Alex, and he made the most of it, exerting himself to be
entertaining, in hopes of having the occasion repeated.

After the first painful moment of greeting and apology, Gay subsided
into a corner of the old settle, but she did not stay there long. It was
impossible to resist the infection of Alex's high spirits. When the
reaction began it swung her to the farthest extreme, into an
irresistible gale of merriment.

Betty's thoughts turned regretfully to the manuscript up-stairs. She was
sorry that the reading had been interrupted. She knew the girls would
have gained a better impression of the book if they could have heard it
without this interruption. There was no telling when there would be an
opportunity to finish it as good as this would have been. Once she had
a hope that Alex would not stay long and that there would still be time
to finish the reading after his departure. But while the candy cooled
Gay started Lloyd and Alex to singing duets, she and Kitty accompanying
them with violin and piano, and she knew that it was useless to hope any
longer. So she settled down to enjoy the sweets and the music as
heartily as the rest of them.

In one of the pauses, while they were searching through a pile of songs
for some duet they wanted, Lloyd crossed over to the settle where Lucy
was sitting beside the candy, and helped herself to a piece.

"I'm sorry Leland is missing this," said Lucy. "It was a time like this
that gave him his nickname of 'Brer Tarrypin.' He used to be devoted to
candy-pulls, and came up to the Post every time he thought we were going
to have one; and he always was like Brer Tarrypin, you know, in the
Uncle Remus stories."

"How is that?" inquired Lloyd, keenly interested. She knew the Uncle
Remus stories by heart and wondered in what way this one had been
applied to the elegant and fastidious Mr. Harcourt.

"Why, you know, Brer B'ar he helped Miss Meadows bring the wood, Brer
Fox he mend the fire, Brer Wolf he kept the dogs off, Brer Rabbit he
greased the bottoms of the plates to keep the candy from sticking, but
'Brer Tarrypin he klum up in a cheer an' say he watch an' see dat de
'lasses didn't bile over.' The boys always used to say that the only
part in the game Leland would take was _watching the lasses_. He'd talk
to their girls while they did the work."

Gay, over at the piano, drew her brows together in a little frown. She
wished that Lucy would be more discreet in her reminiscences, for she
felt that Lloyd was already prejudiced against Leland more than was
desirable. She called out suddenly, "Sister, can't you find that duet
for us? You had it last."

Lucy rose obediently, but lingered a moment to add, as Lloyd laughed,
"Leland doesn't mind it a bit. The boys all got to hailing him in Uncle
Remus fashion, 'Heyo, Brer Tarrypin, wha'r you bin dis long-come-short?'
and he'd answer as a matter of course, 'Lounjun roun', Brer Fox, lounjun
roun'."

"It's mighty interesting to know the history of a nickname," observed
Lloyd, with an amused smile, which Gay interpreted as meaning that this
bit of history was being tucked away for future use.

It was late when Alex went home, taking his revolver with him. He would
be staying all night near by, with a friend of his, he told them, and if
anything else frightened them they were to telephone. He'd come
post-haste to their rescue. Then he made the rounds of all the
down-stairs windows and doors, seeing that each was properly fastened,
and started Lucy on her way up-stairs with the silver pitcher and ladle
safe in her hands. He seemed to leave the sense of his strong protecting
presence behind him. As they bolted the door and heard him go whistling
cheerily down the road, Lucy declared enthusiastically: "He's a nice boy
and he's made us have such a jolly evening that I'm all wound up and
don't feel a bit sleepy. Let's make a night of it and hear the rest of
Betty's story. It doesn't make any difference if it is nearly midnight.
We can sleep as late as we please in the morning, for Jameson isn't
here, and we won't have to consider his convenience."

For once they were of the same mind, all loath to go to bed. So Betty
slipped into a borrowed kimona, shook down her hair and settled herself
comfortably in a cushioned chair beside the lamp.

"If they keep awake to the end," she thought, "that will be a good test.
I'll know then that it has real interest and I'll not be afraid to give
it to the public." So she kept an anxious watch out of the corner of her
eye, intending to stop at the first sign of weariness. But the attention
of her audience was as profound as it had been during the afternoon.
Stifling an occasional yawn herself, she read on and on. It was
half-past two when she laid aside the last page of her manuscript and
looked up timidly to receive the verdict. Lloyd spoke first.

"Betty Lewis, it's perfectly splendid! I'm so proud of you--I've always
been suah you'd make a name for yoahself some day, but I nevah dreamed
you'd do it so early in life, at only twenty!"

"I haven't made it yet, you know," Betty reminded her smiling. "My
friends may be willing to 'pass my imperfections by,' but I've still to
run the gauntlet of the critics."

There was a chorus of protests from the other girls, and Betty's heart
grew warm as she listened to their cordial praise and predictions of
success.

"I'm dying to have a finger in the launching of this little bark," said
Gay. "Let's wrap it up tonight and have it all ready to send off in the
morning. It would be so fine to be able to brag to my grandchildren
that _I_ helped. I have a strong flat box just the size of the
manuscript. I'm sure it will fit it exactly. Wait and I'll go and get
it."

She ran out of the room, and, while she rummaged through a trunk to find
it, Lucy climbed up on a chair to look on the wardrobe shelf for some
heavy wrapping-paper which she had folded away.

"Let me have some part in it too," cried Kitty. "Although I've no idea
what it can be when I'm so far from the source of supplies. Oh, I know
now," she said after an instant's thought. "You'll need a string to tie
around the box. Here's something that will do."

Opening the wicker satchel she had brought with her she took out a
dainty nightgown. It was the work of only a moment to slip out the
fresh, new pink ribbons that had been run through the lace beading.

"Now let me tie it!" she insisted. "See what an artistic bow I can
make!"

When the manuscript had been placed in Gay's box, tied with Kitty's
ribbon and wrapped in Lucy's paper, it was gravely handed over to Lloyd,
who had suggested that as it was to be sent by express it ought to be
sealed.

"There's a stick of sealing-wax in the drawer of the library table,"
said Lucy, "if anybody's brave enough to go down and get it at this 'wee
sma' hour.' It must be nearly three o'clock."

Before she had finished her sentence Lloyd had lighted a candle to carry
down-stairs. She was back in a moment. They all stood around in a circle
while she melted the red wax in the heat of the candle. "Somebody ought
to say an abracadabra charm ovah it," she suggested. "You do it, Kitty."
Then she looked around her helplessly. "What am I going to do for a
seal? Quick, somebody, hand me something off the dressing-table. The
stoppah of that vinaigrette will do."

Before Lucy could hand her the bottle Gay caught up the old silver ladle
and pressed the end of its handle down on the soft wax.

"There's a crest on it," she explained, holding it firmly in place. "The
motto will read backwards, but that won't make any difference. There!"
She lifted the ladle, and they all crowded around to see the clear-cut
impression left in the red wax, of a dagger thrust through a crown. The
tiny reversed letters of the motto were undecipherable, but Gay
translated them.

"Jameson says it's the Latin for 'I strive till I overcome,' and that's
a fine war-cry for Betty. She's striven so long it's bound to bring a
crown, only that other thing ought to be a pen instead of a dagger."

"Let me put one seal on, just for luck," begged Kitty when Lloyd had
carefully fastened both ends of the package. She held the wax to the
flame. "Everybody make a wish," she ordered. "Wish _hard_."

They wished in silence. In silence they looked on while Kitty dropped
the third red drop on the package and pressed into it the crown and the
dagger of the ladle's crest. Then they stood over Betty while she
addressed it to the publisher to whom long ago she had decided to send
it. Then Gay laid it solemnly beside the silver heirlooms as one of the
things "to be carried out first in case of fire."

"Three o'clock and all is well," called Kitty as the chime on the stair
began its warning. "The deed is done and all the omens are auspicious."

"That will be a scene to remember always," thought Betty gratefully,
looking around at the four pretty girls in the candlelight, as they made
a ceremony of the launching of her little ship, their faces filled with
loving interest.

The chickens were crowing for daylight before she fell asleep, for she
could not hinder her happy thoughts from straying off to the future,
when this same little ship should come home from sea with its cargo of
fame and fortune that the girls had predicted. She had dedicated the
book simply "To my Godmother," and she pictured to herself the supreme
moment when she could lay the published volume in her hands. She would
send one to Madam Chartley, she decided, and one to Miss Chilton, whose
instructions in English had been such an inspiration to her. Then, of
course, each one of the girls must have one.

Strangers would write to her, people would thrill with pleasure over her
pages as she had thrilled over other authors, and--oh, yes! _Davy_ must
have one of the very first copies of the book, since he had been the
first lover of her stories. She almost sat up in bed in the excitement
of her next thought. She wondered why it never had occurred to her
before. If the book should be really successful it would bring her money
of her own. She could be the good fairy of the Cuckoo's Nest. How many
comforts she could slip into it to make life easier for poor tired,
over-worked cousin Hetty! And--_Davy could go away to school_!

That last thought sent a warm glad tingle over her. How good God had
been to give her this delightful way of making a Road of the Loving
Heart in every one's memory--with her pen! She felt that her whole life
ought to be a perpetual Thanksgiving, and when she fell asleep with a
smile on her lips, she was repeating drowsily: "My lines have fallen to
me in pleasant places. Yea, I have a goodly heritage."




CHAPTER V

A CAMERA HELPS


SEVERAL days after his return from Lexington, Leland Harcourt sauntered
out of the house, after a late breakfast alone. The bored expression on
his face showed plainly what he thought of the Valley as a summer
resort. His brother and Lucy were off somewhere about the grounds, and
for more than an hour the faint sound of Gay's violin had been floating
up from the rustic arbour, which she claimed as her private domain.

It was a pleasant little retreat, far back from the road in the dense
beech shade, and at such a distance from the house that her energetic
practising could disturb no one. Here every morning before the
distractions of the day began, she religiously devoted an hour to her
music. The time always slipped past that limit if no one came to stop
her, for an absorbing devotion to her work made her oblivious to
everything else when her beloved violin was once tucked under her chin.
Scales and trills and chords, all the finger exercises that kept her
touch supple and sure, were gone through with in faithful routine. Then
the new music she was mastering had its share of careful attention, and
after that she played on and on, as a bird sings, from sheer love of it.

She was improvising when Leland came out on the porch, a light
rollicking little tune, to fit a verse from an Uncle Remus song. It was
a verse which Alex Shelby had repeated as he escorted them over to The
Beeches, the time they spent the night there, the next night after their
burglar scare at the Cabin. Lucy had been so frightened that she gladly
accepted Mrs. Walton's invitation to stay with her until the men of the
family returned.

They had had such a good time. Now the recollection of it was finding
voice in the tune which Gay was trying to manufacture for the words
which Alex had laughingly sung when Lucy stuck in the barb wire fence on
the way over:

    "Hop light, ladies, Oh, Miss Loo,
       Hit take a heap er scrougin'
       Fer to git you throo.
     Hop light, ladies, oh, Miss Loo!"

Gay recalled the straggling little procession through the woods with a
smile, as her bow quavered again through the refrain. They must have
looked ridiculous. There was Lucy lugging the heavy silver pitcher and
Jameson's ladle because she was afraid to leave them behind, and she
herself with her violin case, and Alex carrying the Lindsey spoons and
forks and the enormous seven-branched silver candle-sticks, because Lucy
felt responsible for their safety, since she had rented them with the
house. And there was Ranald bringing up the rear with their suit-cases,
and Kitty laughing at them all for bringing these household gods. She
called Lucy "Ephraim joined to his idols," because she would not put
down the pitcher and ladle even while she crawled through the barb wire
fence. They had cut across lots in the twilight, instead of going around
by the road, not wanting to be seen with a load which looked so much
like burglar's booty.

"If Leland only could have been with us then!" thought Gay regretfully.
"And the night before that when we had such a jolly time with the taffy
and the duets. He would have been on a real friendly footing with them
all by this time. But he's beginning to find it dull. I know he is.
He'll be off again before long if we can't get him interested in
something."

While she was worrying over his evident restlessness and discontent, the
odour of his cigar came floating out to her, and she knew by that token
that he had finished breakfast and needed to be amused. Locking her
violin in its case, she carried it back to the house, prepared to
shoulder her share of this responsibility.

"Good morning, Brer Tarrypin," she called as she came in sight of him
lolling in the hammock. "Lounjoun' roun' as usual, I see. Well, the mail
train is in, so you can come with me to the post-office as soon as I get
my hat."

"Good heavens, Pug!" he groaned. "I vow you're worse than a little
volcano--always in action."

Nevertheless he got up, as she knew he would, and strolled along beside
her. The road in front of the post-office was almost blocked with
carriages. On summer mornings like this nearly every one in the Valley
found some excuse to be at the station when the mail train came in; for
while they waited for the delivery window to open, there was time not
only to attend to the day's marketing, but to meet all one's friends. At
such times the little box of a post-office was the very centre of
neighbourhood sociability, and since everybody knew everybody else, the
gathering was as informal as a family reunion.

Even Gay felt like an old settler. Her previous visit to the Valley had
given her so many acquaintances. As she passed down the straggling line
of men and boys who were leaning against the fence or sitting on the top
rail while they waited, hats were swept off as if a sudden breeze had
scurried along the path. Several of the old Confederate soldiers spoke
her name as they saluted. She had played for them up at the Home twice
on that former visit.

"Oh, the dear little, queer little Valley," she began, but was
interrupted by Leland's calling her attention to the Sherman carriage,
which was moving in and out at a snail's pace through the blockade of
vehicles, stopping repeatedly as greetings were called out to it from
the other carriages. Gay's face brightened as she saw Lloyd on the back
seat, looking as fresh as a snowdrop in her white linen dress.

"Oh, if she'd only ask us up to Locust to spend the morning!" thought
Gay so earnestly that it seemed to her that Lloyd must feel the force of
the "thought-wave" she was trying to project. "It's high time for her
to remember her promise if she expects to accomplish anything."

Lloyd was remembering her promise. It recurred to her the instant that
she caught sight of Leland's dark interesting face as he turned the
corner. As instantly she had looked away, remembering how pointedly he
had ignored her that night at the Cabin. This was the first time she had
seen him since. Now Gay's request seemed utterly absurd. The colour
surged up in her face as she remembered her high resolve about lighting
a vestal fire on the altar of a promise. How ridiculous of her to have
worked herself up into such an exalted mood over nothing. A positive
dislike for the man who had been the cause of it took possession of her,
and she wished heartily that she need never meet him again.

But an encounter could not be avoided long. Gay was pushing eagerly
through the crowd towards the carriage. She would call her in a moment,
then she would have to turn around and at least be decently polite. Just
then a stylish little runabout stopped opposite the carriage, and a lady
leaned out to accost Lloyd. Thankful for the opportunity, Lloyd turned
her back squarely on the post-office and plunged into an animated
conversation. Without glancing in their direction she was conscious
that Gay and Mr. Harcourt were on the curbstone directly behind her, and
would come up the moment that she stopped talking.

"Yes, of co'se, Miss Jennie," they heard her say. "I'm going to town on
the next car, and I'll be glad to get it for you. Yes, we're all going
in for a day's shopping. Mothah and Betty are ovah at the trolley
station now, waiting for me to get the mail."

Miss Jennie, giving voluble directions, began hunting through her
pocketbook for a sample of ribbon which she wanted matched. Gay's hopes
fell. She had counted confidently on taking Leland up to the Locusts to
spend the morning. But just then Lloyd waved her handkerchief to some
one coming down the avenue, and turning, Gay's face brightened. It was
Kitty Walton to whom Lloyd had waved. Strolling along under a white
parasol, in a pale pink dress and with a great bunch of sweet peas in
her hand, she looked so attractive, that Gay felt that Leland would find
The Beeches fully as entertaining a loafing-place as The Locusts. She
decided to take him up there. Again she was doomed to disappointment,
for Kitty's cordial greeting was followed by the almost breathless
announcement that she was about to take her departure from the Valley.

"Oh, when?" called Lloyd, turning to the girls with the friendliest of
smiles, and acknowledging Mr. Harcourt's greeting with a frosty little
bow. "When, where and whyfoah?"

"This evening," answered Kitty, "over to the Martinsville Springs in
Indiana, and because mother is firmly convinced that they are the
panacea for all the ills that flesh is heir to. Really they do help her
wonderfully, and she needs the change, and I like the place myself so
I'm not sorry to go for some reasons. But I do hate to take ten whole
days out of your visit, Gay."

"You can't hate it half as much as I do," answered Gay gloomily, who had
not overlooked Lloyd's cool little bow to Leland. For Lloyd to act
snippy and Kitty to be away ten whole days right in the beginning of
things was fatal to all her plans.

It was just then that help came from a most unexpected source. Not that
she realized then that it was help, but weeks afterward she traced back
several important things to that small beginning.

Miss Katherine Marks came out of the post-office with a handful of
letters. She was about to pass the group beside the Sherman carriage
with only a brief "good morning," when the sight of Kitty's sweet peas
made her pause.

"That reminds me, Kitty," she said. "I've finished mounting that garden
photograph. You may see it now, whenever you come over."

"I'll come right now, Miss Katherine," was the eager response. "I'm wild
to see it, and as we're going to Martinsville this evening this will be
my only chance."

Seeing the unspoken wish in Gay's eager eyes, Miss Marks included all of
them in the invitation. Lloyd glanced at her watch and excused herself,
finding that the car she wanted to take was almost due. She would have
to hurry to reach the station she said. But even in her haste she
noticed that Leland did not join in the regret which the others
expressed, and grown unduly sensitive in regard to his opinion, she
fancied that he looked pleased when she refused. He lifted his hat
perfunctorily, not even glancing at her as he moved away, seemingly
absorbed in adjusting Kitty's parasol, which he had taken possession of,
and was holding over her.

Gay walked on with Miss Marks. Kitty had to stop a moment at the Bisbee
cottage, to leave the sweet peas with a message from her mother. Leland
waited for her at the gate.

"What is this you're getting me into?" he asked, nodding towards Miss
Marks and Gay, who were almost out of sight.

If he had asked the question of Gay she would have explained eagerly
that they were on their way to Clovercroft, to see a collection of
amateur photographs which had taken prizes and gold medals all over the
country, and among them were three at least, that she knew he would want
so desperately, that he would fall all over himself trying to get them.
But it would be of no use to try. He could neither beg, borrow, buy nor
steal them. He might thank his lucky stars that he was permitted just to
stand afar off and gaze at them in hopeless admiration.

But Kitty, instead of enlightening him in any such way turned the talk
into channels of more personal interest, and made the short stroll so
agreeable that it came to an end entirely too soon. He followed her
through the gate wishing that he could invent some excuse whereby to
prolong the pleasure of making her blush and seeing her dark eyes look
up laughingly at him from under the white parasol. At the same time he
wanted to escape the bore of being expected to grow enthusiastic over
some amateur collection in which he felt no interest.

Something of this he expressed in an undertone to Kitty as they stepped
up on to the porch.

"Don't flatter yourself," she advised him, dropping into a seat, "that
you'll be allowed a peep into Miss Katherine's studio. Strangers never
get any farther than the Court of the Gentiles."

"Gay has gone in," he answered, "and her introduction antedates mine not
more than two seconds. Why shouldn't I?"

"Gay is one of the elect. She has the artist soul herself, and Miss
Katherine recognizes the earmarks."

"You insinuate that I haven't them?"

Kitty smiled tantalizingly, and swung her parasol back and forth by its
ivory crook. "No, indeed. I'm not insinuating anything. I'm simply
stating a broad truth. You can't get in. She'll bring out dozens of
pictures for your inspection, but she'll not invite you inside that
studio. Very few people are so favoured."

Up to that moment he had not had the faintest wish to set foot inside
the studio, but her provoking assertions suddenly seemed to make it the
one desirable spot for him to enter. "I'll show you," he declared
rashly. "I'll see it before we leave here. I always get what I want. Now
watch me."

Miss Marks came out with a large photograph exquisitely tinted. So
artistic it was, both in colouring and composition, that Leland's
admiration was as great as his surprise. He had expected to see some
little snap shots such as he had made himself when he had the kodak
fever, the kind that are interesting only to those who take them and
those who are taken. This was so beautiful that no sooner was it in his
hands than he was fired with a desire to possess it. It was the picture
of a rose garden, every bush a glory of bloom, and in the path, her pink
dress caught by a clinging brier, was Kitty herself like another rose,
looking down over her shoulder at the bramble which held her a prisoner
in its thorny clasp.

"It is to illustrate a fairy-tale," explained Miss Marks. "When naughty
Esmerelda runs away from the good prince, everything in the garden is in
league to help him, and Brier Rose catches at her skirts as she hurries
by, and holds her fast."

"Isn't it lovely?" cried Gay, flashing out of the studio with an armful
which Miss Marks had given her permission to show. "Here's Betty taken
as a nun--_Sister Doloroso_--and Lloyd as an Easter angel. It's
perfectly fascinating to hear Miss Marks tell how she got that effect of
flying. Arranged the draperies with Lloyd lying on the floor, and
photographed her from a trap door above. Tell him how you added the
doves' wings please."

Much to her surprise Miss Marks found herself telling things to this
young man that she would not have dreamed of telling to another
stranger; some of the remarkable makeshifts she had used in costumes and
backgrounds. His flattering air of interest drew these confidences from
her as irresistibly as a magnet draws steel.

"You ought to do a series of these garden pictures," he declared, "and
call them 'Garden Fancies' after that poem of Browning's. By the way,
there is a couplet in that which would lend itself charmingly to
illustration, and I saw the very garden that you should use for it,
while I was out driving yesterday. It was one of those straight walk
prim bordered affairs that go with old English cottages."

He could have found no surer path to Miss Marks's good graces. Gay, not
knowing that he had a purpose to gain by it, listened in amazement as he
proceeded to outline picture after picture for the series of Garden
Fancies, even planning costumes and suggesting clever means by which
various obstacles might be overcome. Her astonishment showed itself in
her face, when he even consented to pose himself, as a Spanish
troubadour in a moonlit garden with a guitar.

Kitty, who knew the object of this sudden interest in photography,
laughed outright, but nobody noticed her irrelevant mirth. Miss Marks
was too interested in the new plan, and Gay was too puzzled over his
rapidly growing enthusiasm. Presently, darting a triumphant look at
Kitty, from the corner of his eye, he rose to follow Miss Marks. She was
actually taking him into her inner courts. Kitty made a little grimace
behind his back. She resented his I-told-you-so air, but she could not
help admiring the masterful way in which he had gained his end.

One hasty glance around the studio changed his assumed interest into
real. Impressed by the wonderful results Miss Marks had obtained by the
combination of brush and camera, he was seized by a wish to do something
in the same line himself. Accustomed to the impulsiveness of his
enthusiasms, Gay was not surprised when he began to persuade Miss Marks
to start to work on the Garden Fancies then and there.

The English garden was too far away for them to attempt that morning,
but Miss Marks finally agreed that the moonlight scene might be managed.
It was just the right time of day to take a moonlight picture, while the
sunshine was so direct that it would cast the blackest of shadows. She
could retouch the plate to give it the right effect, and paint in a
moon.

"You'll have to hurry if I'm to be in it," ordered Kitty, "for Mother is
waiting for me this blessed minute. I've a world of things to do in the
next few hours."

"Give us just a quarter of one of them," begged Leland. "I'll attend to
the balcony part if Miss Marks will look after the costumes and tell me
where to find a step-ladder."

"Leland has plenty to amuse him now," thought Gay happily, as she
watched him giving directions to Frazer, the coloured man, who came in
answer to Miss Marks's call. "His foot is on his native heath and his
name's 'McGregor' when it comes to a thing of this sort."

Ten minutes later Kitty found herself looking out of an improvised
balcony, a charming affair outwardly, but most laughable within. A tall
step-ladder had been dragged into the bay window of the music room, and
the upper sash of the middle window pushed down from the top. The thick
vines that grew over it were pulled back to leave an oval opening. It
was out of this leafy oval she leaned from her seat on the top of the
ladder, to smile down on the troubadour below. There was a rose in her
dark hair, a half-furled fan in her hand, and a coquettish glance in her
laughing black eyes.

Leland's costume had been hastily constructed from scraps of stage
property kept for such occasions. It took but a moment to drape a long
cape over one shoulder in graceful folds, twist a piece of velvet into a
little cap and pin a white plume on one side. A row of potted plants
laboriously put in place by Frazer hid the fact that he wore modern
trousers instead of the more picturesque knee breeches which such a
costume demanded.

"Fire away," he ordered, adjusting the guitar to a more comfortable
position.

"Suppose you sing a verse of a real serenade," suggested Miss Marks, "so
as to get into the proper spirit of the thing. Then just as you finish,
while you're looking soulfully into each other's eyes, I'll squeeze the
bulb."

Kitty, seeing the seamy side of his improvised cap, and feeling the
absurdity of her position on the top of the step-ladder, could only
giggle when she tried to look soulful. But Leland had taken part in too
many private theatricals to be disconcerted now. With as impassioned a
gaze as any Romeo ever fixed on his Juliet, he struck the soft chords of
a Spanish serenade, and began to sing so meaningly that Kitty's giggle
was silenced, and she looked down with a conscious blush:

    "Thine eyes are stars of morning,
     Thy lips are crimson flowers.
     Good night, good night, beloved,
     While I count the weary hours."

"There! That ought to be perfect," cried Miss Marks, emerging from under
the black cloth which covered the camera. "Mr. Harcourt, you're the most
satisfactory man I've ever had pose for me. It's easy enough to get a
score of pretty girls any time I need them, but it isn't once in a
decade one finds such an altogether desirable model of a man. You seem
to know by intuition exactly the right positions to fall into. I'm sure
the series will be a success now."

Leland bowed his appreciation of the compliment, and Gay, knowing his
vulnerable spot and how secretly pleased he was, could have danced a
breakdown in her delight.

As they were all eager to see the result, Miss Marks took herself at
once to the dark room with the plate, promising they should have a proof
before time for the Martinsville train. Then Gay and Leland walked home
with Kitty, and stayed talking awhile on the shady porch.

"It's been a very decent sort of morning," Leland admitted on his way
home to lunch. A siesta in the hammock shortened the afternoon. He was
in a most agreeable mood when they drove over to the station to see the
Waltons off on their train.

Better than her promise, Miss Marks had sent a finished picture instead
of a proof. It was fully as good as the one of Brier Rose and Esmerelda,
and Leland was enthusiastic in his admiration of the balcony he had
improvised, and the Spanish beauty within it. When it had passed around
the circle he coolly took possession of it, although Kitty claimed it,
as Frazer had brought it up to The Beeches.

"I'll keep it till your return, Miss Kitty," he said. "You have your
mirror, so you don't need this. It may inspire me to run over to the
Springs myself a few days to see the original if you stay away too
long."

Something in the light tone made Gay glance up quickly. She groaned as
she saw the admiration his expressive eyes showed so plainly.

"Now he's gone and done it!" she thought in dismay. "He's taken a fancy
to Kitty instead of Lloyd, when I've set my heart on saving Kitty for
Frank Percival. May blessings light on those old Martinsville Springs
for taking her out of the way for awhile! Maybe I can get him switched
off on the other track before she comes back."




CHAPTER VI

"GARDEN FANCIES"


"OH, where are you going, my pretty maid?" It was Alex Shelby who called
out the question, leaning forward from the doctor's buggy, to look down
the locust avenue. Lloyd was coming toward the gate, swinging a hunter's
horn back and forth by its green cord. She waved it gaily as she sang in
response:

"I'm going a posing, sir, she said."

He turned the wheel and sprang out, asking eagerly, "Is it anywhere that
I can take you?"

"No, you're going in exactly the opposite direction, for I'm bound for
the spring in the Lindsey woods. Miss Marks asked me to meet her there
at eleven o'clock, but her note didn't come until aftah mothah had gone
out with the carriage."

Alex glanced at his watch. "If you could wait till I take this case of
instruments up to Uncle, I could drive you over as well as not. It would
detain you ten minutes, but even then you'd get to the Spring much
sooner than if you were to walk."

"I'll certainly accept yoah offah," exclaimed Lloyd gratefully, looking
down the long hot way that lay between her and the Lindsey woods.

"No, I'll not drive ovah to the doctah's with you, thanks. That is such
a hot, dusty stretch of road. I'll just sit heah in the shade and wait."
Laying the hunter's horn on the stone bench near the gate, she sat down
beside it and began to fan herself with her hat.

"What's going on at the spring?" he asked as he climbed back into the
buggy.

"I can't tell you. All I know is that old Frazer came up with a note
asking me to pose as Olga, the Flax-spinnah's maiden. Miss Marks is
always illustrating some old fairy-tale. She wanted me to bring
grandfathah's hunting hawn for the prince. I've been wondering evah
since who she's found to take that paht."

"Harcourt, I'll bet you anything!" was Alex's emphatic answer as he
gathered up the reins. "I saw him over at Clovercroft yesterday morning,
setting up a tripod in front of the bay window. Well, here goes. I'll be
back in ten minutes."

As Lloyd watched the cloud of dust whirling along behind the rapidly
disappearing buggy, the impulse seized her to call out after him that he
needn't come back to take her to the spring, for she was not going.
Several times that morning the suspicion had crossed her mind that Miss
Marks's new model might prove to be Leland Harcourt, and Alex's emphatic
answer seemed to confirm her misgivings. If that were the case she felt
that she could not possibly go. He had made such a point of avoiding her
that night at the Cabin, that even Betty had noticed it, and she was
very sure she didn't want to have her picture taken with a man who had
showed his aversion to her so plainly as all that. It would be horribly
awkward, she thought, if Miss Marks had asked him to pose with her. He
would have to stoop and drink out of her hands as the prince had done
out of Olga's. Of course he couldn't refuse, and it would be
disagreeable to him and embarrassing to her, knowing as she did how he
felt towards her.

It was unlike Lloyd to be sensitive over little things, and to magnify
trifles, and she had been unhappy for several days because she had done
so in this instance. If she had met Leland Harcourt like any other
stranger, she would not have given his manner toward her a second
thought; but Gay's plea beforehand in his behalf made her
self-conscious. Of course he couldn't possibly know that she had lain
awake, looking at the stars, picturing herself as a sort of guardian
angel, who should lead him to great heights of achievement (as Gay had
assured her she could do). But she felt that he must have divined her
intentions toward him, and was secretly amused at her presumption. Her
face burned every time she thought of the regal manner in which she had
swept into the room, trying to make her entrance impressive, and then
the polite way in which he had handed her over to some one else as if
she were a mere child to whom he must be civil, but whose school-girl
prattle bored him.

"I can't _beah_ him!" she said in a disgusted tone to a black ant, which
was crawling along towards the stone bench where she sat. But the little
ant, intent on its own affairs, hurried past her as unheedingly as if
she had been part of the bench.

"And I suppose my opinion is of no moah impawtance to him than it is to
you," she added, with a shrug of the shoulders. Then she laughed, for
the comparison suddenly seemed to put the affair in a different light.

"I'm certainly glad you happened along this way, Mistah Ant," she said,
bending over to stop him with a stick while she made her whimsical
speech. "Because I'm going to profit by yoah example from now on. Heah
me? I'm going to quit worrying over what people may think of me and go
along about my business just as you are doing. _You_ nevah think about
yoahself, do you! You don't even know that you _have_ a self, so of
co'se you can't feel slighted and sensitive."

Lifting the stick so that the little creature might go on its eager way
again, she watched it disappear, and then began idly tracing figures in
the dust at her feet.

"I wish I had an enchanted necklace like Olga's," she mused, recalling
the old fairy-tale for which she was soon to pose. "Not one that could
give me gorgeous dresses whenevah I repeated the charm, but one that
would sawt of clothe my mind--put me into such a beautifully serene
mental state that I wouldn't mind slights, and would be as unconscious
of self as that little old ant."

Then a surprised, pleased expression lighted her face, as a sudden
recollection seemed to illuminate the old fairy-tale, and give it a new
meaning.

"Why, it's like that lovely verse in the Psalms that Miss Allison read
to the King's Daughters, the first time I went to a meeting of the
Circle. '_The King's Daughter is all glorious within. Her clothing is
of wrought gold._'" Sentences from Miss Allison's earnest little talk of
long ago began coming back to Lloyd like fragments of forgotten music.
Something about being anointed with the "oil of gladness" and wearing
garments that smelled of myrrh and aloes and cassia "out of the ivory
palaces whereby they have made thee glad."

Now in the story when Olga would change her gown of tow to one befitting
her royal station, she had only to clasp a bead of her magic rosary and
whisper:

    "For love's sweet sake, in my hour of need,
     Blossom and deck me, little seed,"

and straightway she would be clad in a garment, fine and fair as the
shimmer of moonbeams. And Lloyd, casting about in her mind for a like
charm that would make her "all glorious within" as Olga's made her
glorious without, suddenly bethought herself of her little necklace of
Roman pearls. She had not taken it back to school with her in her Senior
year, for she felt that she had outgrown its childish symbolism. She
could "keep tryst" with life's obligations now without the visible
reminder of a little white bead, slipped daily over a silken cord.
Still, it had helped her to remember, so many times in the past, that
she was strongly tempted to try the efficacy of her little talisman just
once more. Glancing at her watch, she saw that Alex had been gone only
five minutes. Then dropping the stick with which she had been writing in
the dust, she ran lightly up the avenue, into the house and up to her
room.

"Maybe it is sawt of childish," she thought as she opened the
sandal-wood box and clasped the rosary around her neck. "But I don't
care, if it will only help me to remembah not to be snippy and sensitive
and to go about my business like that little black ant. It's funny how
such a little thing started me on the right path."

When Alex came back she met him with such a shining face that he glanced
at her curiously. "You look as if you had heard good news," he said as
he helped her into the buggy. "What's happened?"

"Oh, nothing," she laughed. "I've just been practising my paht while I
waited for you. I'm the Princess Olga, and I've gotten rid of my gown of
tow, and I'm so relieved to find the real King's-daughtah attire, that
I'm as happy as a June-bug."

He did not understand her allusion, but it would have made no difference
if she had talked to him in Greek, with that charming dimple coming and
going as she laughed. It was a pleasure just to sit and watch her, while
she rattled on in her inimitable way about June-bugs, wondering how
happy they were anyhow, and why people chose them as the unit of
measurement when they were measuring joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over at the spring while they waited for Lloyd to come, Miss Marks and
Leland Harcourt experimented at picture-making with Gay for a victim.
Stretched out on the rocks of the creek bank, with her hands lying in
the shallow water and her hair streaming over her shoulders, she was
obligingly trying to obey instructions to "look as wet and dead as
possible."

Lloyd and Alex, coming on her unexpectedly as they picked their way up
the ravine, having tied the horse where the woodland road ended, were
horrified to find her lying there so limp and still. But the next
instant Leland's voice sounded somewhere up among the bushes: "That's
great, Pug. Try to keep the pose a little longer till we get one more
plate. With a sea-gull and some rolling waves painted in in the
background, it will be a perfect copy of that painting I saw in
Brittany."

"Well, hurry, please!" called Gay plaintively. "I can't stand it much
longer. The sun on my wet face is burning it to a blister, and the rocks
are cutting my elbow, and I know it's a spider that's crawling over the
back of my neck."

Lloyd gave a toot of the hunter's horn to warn them of their approach
and the extra plate was never made. For with a little shriek the
"Drowned Fishermaiden" scrambled up from the rocks in embarrassed haste,
and when she caught sight of Alex, fled away into the bushes to gather
up her dishevelled hair and otherwise put herself to rights. She was too
agitated to notice Lloyd's meeting with Leland, but while she made
herself presentable the sound of laughter floated in among the bushes to
her most reassuringly.

"They're laughing at me," she thought, "but I don't care how ridiculous
I looked. _Anything to_ break the ice between them and put them on a
friendly footing."

At the sight of Leland's dark face with its cynical, slightly amused
expression, Lloyd's resentment returned, but the touch of the little
necklace recalled her resolve. "I'll _not_ be snippy and sensitive," she
repeated to herself, clasping one of the beads in her fingers as if it
really held some potent charm to help her change her mental attitude.

So when Gay joined them she found that Lloyd had dropped her distant,
disdainful manner of the day before and was her own sweet, winsome self.
It was with a sigh of relief that Gay left them to the discussion of
poses and costumes, and turned to Alex, who was about to take his
departure. The one word, picnic, was enough to stop him. It was what he
had been hoping for ever since the Harcourts had taken the Cabin. Gay's
appeal for help set him to work with the zest of a truant school-boy.

While he made a fire and carried water from the spring, Gay emptied the
baskets they had brought, and spread the contents out on a great flat
rock. Then while the water boiled for the coffee, and the potatoes were
roasting in the ashes, she sent him to look for a wild grape-vine.

"I want a lot of grape-leaves to make into little baskets to serve the
berries in," she told him. "And bring them up here where I can keep an
eye on what is going on at the spring. There seems to be a hitch in the
performance somewhere."

The difficulty was with the prince's costume. Nothing they had brought
gave quite the effect they wanted, so finally Leland proposed bringing
the story down to date.

"The modern Princess is the Summer Girl," he said. "So take Miss
Sherman just as she is, and I'll go back to the Cabin and put on a
bicycle suit."

[Illustration: "MAKING A CUP OF HER WHITE HANDS."]

"They are getting on famously," thought Gay as she listened to Lloyd's
merry response to something he called back, as he went crashing away
through the bushes. The last little basket was made and filled with
berries before Leland came back, dragging his wheel up the ravine. Gay
and Alex, having finished their preparations, climbed up the bank to
watch the pretty tableau, Lloyd making a cup of her white hands and
catching the water in them, that the prince might stoop and drink.

"Let's try it again, Miss Marks," cried Leland enthusiastically. "How is
this pose?" He dropped gracefully to one knee, baring his head as he
bowed it over Lloyd's hands.

"Is the change in him or is it in me?" thought Lloyd as the dark eager
face smiled up at her, with its quick flashing smile that she found so
peculiarly attractive. "He certainly is the most entahtaining man I evah
talked to."

"The show is over," called Gay as Miss Marks began to put up her camera.
"If your royal highnesses will deign to descend, dinner will be served
immediately." It was an attractive table she led them to, the red
berries shining in luscious heaps in their little green baskets,
mounds of fresh watercress beside every plate, and a big bouquet of
wildflowers in the centre of the rock table.

"What is the peculiar charm of a picnic?" queried Alex as he fished an
ant out of the sugar and opened a half-cooked potato.

"At home one would send such a dish back to the kitchen in red-hot
wrath. Here one eats it in a sort of solemn joy."

"It's the spell of the June woods," suggested Miss Marks.

"No, it's youth in the blood," said Leland. "All the Junes in the world
and all outdoors wouldn't make a half-baked potato fit for the gods
unless one has 'the sun and the wind in his pulses.'"

"No," insisted Gay. "It can't be that, for Jameson isn't much older than
you, and he despises prowling around in the woods, as he calls it. He
made so much fun of it that Lucy went driving with him instead of coming
with us, and she adores such outings, just as much now as she did before
she was married."

"Maybe no one feels the charm unless the gods have given him a sort of
Midas touch that will turn everything disagreeable, like ants and
underdone potatoes, into golden experiences," said Alex. "The Midas
imagination let us call it. And the way to keep it in good working order
is to give it constant practice. Let's have a picnic every day."

"To-morrow," announced Leland, "I'll take you all over to that old
English garden that I discovered, to take that Garden fancy of
Browning's we were discussing."

Gay looked up quickly. It had been understood only yesterday that they
were to wait for Kitty's return for that picture. His taking it for
granted that Lloyd would assume the part augured well for her hopes.

"You know that poem of Browning's, don't you, Miss Sherman?" he asked,
smiling across at her.

Now Lloyd had never cared for Browning. In fact she frankly admitted
that she had never got far enough into many of his poems to know what he
was talking about. At Warwick Hall Miss Chilton had been such an
enthusiastic interpreter of his that ten of the girls in Lloyd's class
had formed a Browning club. Although she declined their invitation to
join them, she was more complimented by that invitation than any other
of that school term, and envied them their apparent enjoyment of what to
her was a tangle of vague meanings. Now when, she saw Leland take a well
worn copy from his pocket and flip over the leaves to find the place,
with an ease that showed long familiarity with it, she wished that she
had joined the club. It made her feel childish and immature to think
that she could not discuss this subject with him as any one of those ten
girls could have done. But it was one of the simple poems to which the
book opened. From her seat opposite, Lloyd could see the marked margins
and underscored lines, as he read aloud:

    "'Here is the garden she walked across
     Arm in my arm such a short while since.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Down this side of the gravel walk
    She went, while her robe's edge brushed the box.
    And here she paused in her gracious talk
    To point me a moth on the milk-white phlox.'"

"Oh, I can just _see_ that picture," cried Miss Marks enthusiastically.
"I wish we had time to take it to-day."

"But wait, here's a better one," he added, turning the page.

    "'This flower she stopped at, finger on lip,
     Stooped over in doubt, as settling its claim,
     Till she gave me with pride to make no slip,
     Its soft, meandering Spanish name.
     What a name! Was it love or praise?
     Speech half-asleep or song half-awake?
     I must learn Spanish one of these days
     Only for that slow, sweet name's sake.'"

Lloyd picked up the book open at the place where he laid it, face
downward, on the rock.

"I wondah what flowah Browning meant," she said, "that had such a 'soft,
meandering Spanish name. Speech half-asleep or song half-awake--' It
must have been something exquisitely beautiful or he wouldn't have been
willing to learn a language just for the sake of knowing that one name."

Farther down the page were other underscored lines. She read them
softly, almost under her breath.

    "'Where I find her not, beauties vanish.
     Whither I follow her beauties flee.
     Is there no method to tell her in Spanish
     June is twice June since she's breathed it with me?'"

"Isn't that sweet?" cried Gay. "Say it for us, Leland. Say it in Spanish
so we can hear how it sounds."

With an indulgent smile, as if amused at her childishness, he lazily did
Gay's bidding, then as she began exclaiming over the musical syllables
to Alex, he turned to Lloyd and repeated the line with an emphasis which
made it altogether personal. Of course she could not understand it, but
the words were like bird-notes, and there was no mistaking the language
of those dark expressive eyes that held hers a moment in their admiring
gaze. They said as plainly as if they had spoken aloud, "June is twice
June, since _you've_ breathed it with me."

Lloyd felt the colour surge up into her face, and to hide it, turned
quickly and began examining a grass stain on the hem of her skirt, with
apparent concern. But an exultant little thrill flashed over her. He
liked her. She was sure of it, and it made her glad, so glad that it
amazed her to think that only two hours before she had confided
emphatically to a little black ant crawling over her path, that she
couldn't bear him.

When she had finished a critical examination of the grass stain she
glanced back again, hoping that Gay had not seen her embarrassment. To
her relief Gay's entire attention was absorbed in an argument with Alex
as to the exact meaning of the quotation, whether twice June meant a
lengthening of the calendar or an intensifying of its pleasures. Miss
Marks, like a good chaperone, could not have noticed, for she was busy
gathering up the dishes, and Lloyd sprang up to help her.

Presently, as they started away from the spring, Leland came around to
Lloyd's side. "You must let me teach you Spanish, Miss Sherman," he said
in his masterful way which seemed to leave her no choice in the matter.
"An hour a day wouldn't take much of your time, and would be enough to
give you some idea of the charm of the language. Gay tells me you play
the harp. Some of the songs are exquisite."

"Oh, I nevah in the world could learn it, I am suah!" she answered
lightly, with a shrug that seemed to indicate the uselessness of
undertaking such a task.

"You don't know," he answered authoritatively. "You've never had me for
a teacher."

Again that flashing look that made his eyes deepen so wonderfully and
curved the cynical lips into an altogether gentle and winning smile. It
seemed to photograph itself on Lloyd's memory, recurring to her again
and again in the most unexpected moments. She saw it on the way home
with Alex, all the time she was laughingly recounting some of her
Warwick Hall escapades. It came between her and her book when she tried
to read herself to sleep that afternoon, and the last thing that night
when her eyes were closed and the lights were out she saw again that
glance that said as plainly as the slow music of his Spanish words,
"June is _twice_ June since _you've_ breathed it with me."




CHAPTER VII

SPANISH LESSONS


THE Harcourt carriage swung rapidly along the road, for the Little
Colonel held the reins, and was testing the speed of the new horses,
just sent down from Lexington.

"Isn't it glorious?" she cried, with a quick glance over her shoulder at
Gay and Miss Marks on the back seat. "It's like flying, the way they
take us through the air, and they're the best matched team in the
country."

Leland, on the seat beside her, watched with growing admiration her
expert handling of the horses, and Gay watched him. Swathed in a white
chiffon veil, she was paying the penalty for being so obliging the day
before. She had lain so long on the rocks in her pose of the drowned
fishermaiden, that her face was burned to a blister, and she could not
touch it without groaning. But she would willingly go through the ordeal
again, she told herself, in order to bring about the present desirable
state of affairs.

"Now which way?" asked Lloyd as they came to a turn. "I feel like a
Columbus on an unsailed sea. I thought I knew every gah'den around heah
within a radius of five miles, but I've nevah seen any that fits the
description of the one you're taking us to."

"Turn to the right," Leland directed. "Then it's just a short way down a
woodland road. You'll come to an old-fashioned wicket gate and a
straight, box-bordered walk leading up to the back of such a quaint
vine-covered old house with a red door, that you'll expect to see a
thatched roof and hear an English skylark."

"Well, of all things," laughed Lloyd, "why didn't you say little red
doah in the first place. That would have located it for me. You've
simply discovahed the back premises of old Doctah Shelby's place, and
yoah wondahful English gah'den is their kitchen gah'den. We could have
reached their front gate in ten minutes from our house, and heah you
have led us all around Robin Hood's bahn to find it. That loop around
Rollington took us a good two miles out of the way."

"Well, that's the only way I knew how to reach it," he answered, with
the flashing smile she had learned to look for. "I hope that you don't
feel that it has been time wasted. _I_ don't."

"Not behind hawses like these," she answered. "We'll forgive you for the
sake of the ride. I nevah get tiahed of driving when I can go this
fast."

She turned into a narrow lane leading around to the front of the house,
and waited for Leland to open the gate.

"How natural everything looks," she exclaimed. "I haven't been heah for
yeahs, and when I was a little thing of six or seven I used to be a
weekly visitah. I'd bring my dawg Fritz, and stay from breakfast till
bedtime. I called Doctah Shelby 'Mistah-_my_-doctah' and his wife 'Aunt
Alicia,'" she went on as Leland resumed his seat in the carriage. "They
said that I reminded them of their only daughtah, who was dead, and they
used to borrow me by the day. They spoiled me so that it was perfectly
scandalous the way I acted sometimes."

"Why did you stop coming?" asked Gay.

"Mrs. Shelby had a fall that made an invalid of her, and she has been
away at sanitariums and hospitals most of the time since. I've seen her
often, of co'se, but not heah. It's only lately that they've opened up
the house and come home to live."

Places exercised a strong influence over Lloyd. Just as she felt the
challenge of the locust-trees in the avenue at home, and could not pass
those old family sentinels without an unconscious lifting of the head
and that pride of bearing which they seemed to expect from all the
Lloyds, so this old homestead had its peculiar effect upon her. As she
went up the path she had the same feeling of absolute sovereignty that
she had had a dozen years before when her slightest wish was law in this
adoring household, and where every act of hers, no matter how
outbreaking, passed unchided. If she chose to empty the sugar into the
middle of the garden walk and fill the bowl with pebbles, "Aunt Alicia"
took her afternoon tea unsweetened, rather than ring for more, and thus
call Mom Beck's attention to the naughtiness of her little charge.

Once, some babyish whim prompting her to order every picture turned to
the wall, the doctor meekly obeyed, and when some chance caller
remonstrated, he protested that it was a very small thing to do to give
a child pleasure, and that there was no reason why she shouldn't have
them upside down if she wished. So strong was the old spell now, that
as she stepped up on the porch and saw the same ugly little Chinese
idol sitting against the front door to prop it open, that had sat there
on all her former visits, she stooped and stood it on its head.

"Why on earth did you do that?" gasped Gay.

"Simply fo'ce of habit," laughed Lloyd. "I used to hate it so because it
was such an ugly old thing that I always stood it on its head to punish
it for staring at me. I did it this time without thinking."

Leland laughed. Never in the short time he had known her had she seemed
quite so adorable as she did at this moment, relapsing into the childish
imperiousness of her Little Colonel ways. While they waited for Mrs.
Shelby to come down he watched her going around the room, renewing her
acquaintance with all the old objects that had once held a fascination
for her. She called his attention to the tapestry on the wall, a
shepherd and shepherdess beside a trellis on which hung roses as big as
cabbages, and told him the quaint fancies she had once had about the
romantic figures. The stuffed birds under the glass case on the mantel
each had a name she had given it. She remembered them all, from the
yellow canary, to the mite of a humming-bird, poised at the top.

Stopping before a queer old whatnot, filled with bric-à-brac and shells,
she caught up a round china box. A gilt eagle, hovering over a nest of
little eaglets formed the lid, and her face began to dimple as she
lifted the china bird by its imposing beak.

"There ought to be peppahmints inside," she said. "There always used to
be, because I'd howl if there wasn't, and they couldn't beah to have me
disappointed. Well, I wish you'd look! Deah old Aunt Alicia! She's
remembahed all these yeahs and kept it ready for me."

She held the box out towards him, and he saw that it had been freshly
filled with delectable little striped drops.

"It hurts my conscience," she said, looking up wistfully, as the
familiar odour of the peppermint greeted her, "to think how I have
neglected her. Heah I have been going to picnics and pahties and all
sawts of things evah since I came home from school, and have nevah been
neah her. I'm going to find her this minute, and not wait for her to
come down as if I were some strangah."

The quaintly furnished old room straightway lost its charm for Leland
when she left it, but Gay, pushing aside her veil to taste the contents
of the eagle's nest, which Lloyd had deposited in her lap, scrutinized
everything with interest. This was Alex's home now, and she wondered how
he would look in the midst of such surroundings. She couldn't imagine
him with such an antiquated background. Miss Marks picked up a basket of
daguerreotypes from the marble-topped table, and began examining them.

They could hear Lloyd calling at the top of the stairs, "Aunt Alicia,"
and then Mrs. Shelby's voice, tremulous with pleased surprise: "Why it's
the Little Colonel! Oh, my dear! My _dear_! what a joy it is to have you
here again!" Then they heard Lloyd laughingly explaining their mission,
and after that they seemed to pass into another room, for a low hum of
voices was all that could be distinguished.

Presently Mrs. Shelby came down alone. She was a gentle little old lady,
with faded blue eyes, and a sweet patient face. She wore a bunch of gray
curls over each ear in the fashion of her girlhood. There was a
lingering charm of youth about her, just as there was a faint suggestion
of lavender still clinging to the fine old lace that fell over her
little hands. Almost as soon as she had finished welcoming them an old
coloured man followed her into the room, bearing a huge tray with
tinkling glasses, a decanter of raspberry shrub, and a plate of little
nut-cakes. While he served the guests she explained Lloyd's delay with
almost girlish eagerness.

"I have taken a great liberty with your model, Miss Marks, but Lloyd
assured me you would be perfectly willing. This last day of June is a
very happy anniversary of mine and the doctor's. I have been thinking of
it all morning, and when Lloyd came up the stairs just now, so glowing
and bright, it seemed to me I saw my own lost youth rising up before me,
and I asked her to put on a gown I have treasured many years, and be
photographed in that.

"It is the one I had on when Richard proposed to me," she explained, a
faint pink tingeing her soft old cheeks. "Fifty years ago to-day, in
that same old garden. This was my grandmother's place then. Richard
bought it afterwards. And a year from to-day if we live, we will keep
our golden wedding. If you can use the gown in the photograph it will
make me very happy, for it is falling to pieces, despite my care of it.
Lloyd thought it very picturesque and appropriate."

While Miss Marks was expressing her delight over the privilege, for the
unearthing of old costumes was one of her pet diversions, Lloyd came
down the stairs and stopped shyly in the doorway. She had tucked up her
shining hair with a tall ivory comb, and it hung in soft curls on each
side of her glowing face, in the old fashion of Mrs. Shelby's girlhood.
The thin, clinging dress enveloped her like a pale blue cloud, and a
flat, wide-brimmed garden hat swung from her arm by its blue ribbons.
With the donning of the ancient dress she seemed to have put on the
sweet shy manner that had been the charm of its first wearer.

A long-drawn "oh!" of admiration from Gay and Miss Marks greeted her
appearance, and she turned a timid glance towards Leland, who had risen
quickly. His glance and his silence were more eloquent than their words,
for she turned away blushing.

"Now if I may have a bit of paper to make a moth to pin on the
milk-white phlox," began Miss Marks, but Mrs. Shelby stopped her
eagerly.

"Oh, my dear, we will have the picture perfect in every way. Richard has
a case of butterflies and moths in his office. I shall send a servant to
bring it and to call him over, for he will want to see Lloyd in that
gown I am sure. How I wish Alex were here to be photographed with her.
He is so broad shouldered and erect he reminds me daily of what his
uncle was at his age."

"Maybe he will come before we are through," suggested Miss Marks. At the
mere thought of his coming, Gay pulled her veil down hastily over her
blistered face. Behind its protecting screen she watched the old couple
keenly, when the doctor arrived. They had eyes for nothing but Lloyd,
and their gaze followed her tenderly wherever she went.

"They're just _daffy_ about her," thought Gay. "It's plain to be seen
they'd give anything in the world to get her into the family. I hope
Doctor Alex won't come in time to be photographed with her. If he'd
never fallen in love with her before he'd have to do it now. He couldn't
help himself when she looks like that, and then where would all my plans
be for poor Leland?"

But Leland was taking care of his own interests. As soon as Miss Marks
had taken enough plates to satisfy herself he led Lloyd off to the end
of the garden to show her a flower which he had found with a soft
meandering Spanish name.

"We'll begin the lessons to-morrow," he said, as if it were all settled.
The masterfulness of his tone had pleased her the day before, but here
in the place where she had done all the dictating and others had
obeyed, it aroused a feeling that Mom Beck would have labelled "the
Lloyd stubbo'ness." She didn't want to consent, simply because he had
taken it for granted that she would, so she laughingly contradicted him.

"We'll begin to-morrow," he repeated, smiling down at her so insistently
that she dropped her eyes before his. Then to her surprise she found
that her opposition had completely vanished. She felt that it would be
one of the pleasantest pastimes that could be devised, to study such a
musical language under such a teacher. But she had no intention of
letting him know how she felt about it for a long while, so she was
thankful for the interruption which came just then.

Miss Marks, who was exploring the rest of the premises in search of
further possibilities, sent Gay to summon her to the front of the house.

"She says to 'come into the garden, Maud.' She is going to add a
Tennysonian pose to her series of Fancies, and she's found a place where
there's a bit of terrace for you to come tripping down, à la Maud, to
the tune of 'She is coming, my own, my sweet!'"

Catching up her long filmy blue skirt, Lloyd hurried away, leaving Gay
and Leland to follow as they chose. Leland finished the verse in a
clear tenor voice as if singing to himself, but it followed Lloyd down
the walk as if meant for her alone:

    "'She is coming, my own, my sweet!
      Were it ever so airy a tread
      My heart would hear her and beat
      Though 'twere earth in an earthy bed.
      Would start and tremble under her feet
      And blossom in purple and red.'"

Then he hummed it almost under his breath, the entire verse again,
forgetful of Gay at his elbow until she spoke.

"Wouldn't Kitty have looked adorable in that darling old hat tied under
her chin? It's too bad she couldn't have been here to pose as Maud."

"Oh, I don't know," he answered absently. "She's too dark for the part.
Miss Lloyd looks it to perfection."

Gay's eyes shone delightedly behind the white veil, and for a few steps
she could not help skipping, as she blessed the Martinsville Springs,
which had taken Kitty off in the nick of time to save her for a
different fate. By the time Maud's picture was taken Alex arrived, and
Miss Marks was promptly seized with an inspiration.

"I am going to have two pictures of _Darby and Joan_," she exclaimed,
"to add to the series. Alex, you take Lloyd down into the garden again
beside the phlox, and turn so that I'll get your profile. It is so like
your uncle's. I'll call that one '_Hand in hand when our life was May._'
Then I'll take Mrs. Shelby and the doctor in exactly the same position
as a companion piece, and call that '_Hand in hand when our hair is
gray._'"

They made a joke of it, the two old people, and obligingly took the
places that Lloyd and Alex left, but a mist sprang to Lloyd's eyes a
moment later, watching the devoted old couple who for fifty years had
been lovers and for forty-nine years had been wed. Marriage like that
seemed a beautiful thing; she wondered if such an experience would ever
be hers. She wished Mammy Easter had found a better fortune for her than
the one she told over her tea-cup.

It was noon by the time the pictures were all taken, and Leland took
Miss Marks home in the carriage while Lloyd went up-stairs to change her
dress. She wanted Gay and Leland to stop at The Locusts for lunch, but
Gay refused because she couldn't go to the table in a veil and under the
circumstances she couldn't go without one. She got out of the carriage,
however, and sat on the porch while Leland took the old Colonel for a
short spin down the road, to try the new horses.

"It's been a mighty nice morning," she said. "I wish Lucy could have
been with us. She adores discovering old places like that and doing
unexpected things. It almost spoiled my good times thinking of the
wistful way she looked after us when we drove off."

"But she's married!" exclaimed Lloyd. "I shouldn't think she'd care for
those things in quite the same way as she did before. I should think
she'd rather stay with her husband."

"Bosh!" said Gay. "Being married doesn't change a person's disposition
and make tame old hens out of lively little humming-birds. That's just
what Lucy was, a dear little humming-bird, always in a flutter of doing
and going; and you needn't tell me that she enjoys poking there at home
with nobody but Jameson, as much as she would enjoy going out with us
and doing things."

"But he's her husband!" insisted Lloyd, as if that term covered all that
could be desired of human companionship. Then she hummed meaningly:

    "'Hand in hand when our life was May,
     Hand in hand when our hair is gray!'"

Gay shrugged her shoulders impatiently. "Oh, that Darby and Joan
business is all right when your hair _is_ gray, but Lucy is only a year
older than I am, and Jameson doesn't interest himself in a single thing
that she likes. He's devoted to her, so devoted he doesn't want her out
of his sight; but it's the kind of devotion that has taught me a lesson.
If ever I tie myself up that way it will not be while life is May. I'll
have a good time first."

Lloyd had no answer for such heresy. She was going over in her mind the
list of people from whom she had unconsciously taken her exalted
impressions of married life: her mother and Papa Jack, the old Colonel
and Amanthis, Doctor Shelby and Aunt Alicia, Rob's father and mother.
She felt that Gay was mistaken. To be sure there were old Mr. and Mrs.
Apwall, who quarrelled like cats and dogs, but somehow even they had
given her the impression that they enjoyed their little encounters, and
quarrelled to pass the time, rather than because they bore each other
any ill-will. Then she reflected that these were all people of an older
generation than Lucy, and maybe there was a difference in the times.
Surely Gay must have good reason for speaking so feelingly. This was not
the first time that she had spoken of Lucy with tears in her eyes, and
when she did that, Lloyd, recalling Mammy Easter's tea-cups, was vaguely
glad that it had been foretold that hers would be empty.

The old Colonel came back in a few minutes loud in his praise of the new
horses, and to Lloyd's surprise, in high good humour with their owner.
Evidently Leland had improved his opportunity and had exerted himself to
make friends with the old Colonel, for to Lloyd's amazement he cordially
insisted on Leland's considering The Locusts a second home as long as he
should be in the Valley, and to come at any hour he chose. The
latch-string would be out for him.

"I shall certainly avail myself of the privilege very soon," he
responded, "for to-morrow I have the honour to begin giving Miss Lloyd
lessons in Spanish. So few young ladies nowadays play the harp, that
when one has the ability she owes it to the world to learn the Spanish
songs. Don't you think so?"

Lloyd opened her mouth to protest that she had not yet given her
consent, but closed it again as the old Colonel began expressing his
pleasure at such an arrangement. She felt trapped. It was to please him
that she had learned to play on her grandmother's harp. Any reference to
it always put him in a gentle humour. She wanted him to be cordial and
friendly with Leland, and was glad that he was no longer prejudiced
against him, so she held her peace; but it exasperated her to have her
consent taken for granted in such a high-handed way. He had ridden over
her objection as regardlessly as if she had never made any.

She had boasted to herself, "He needn't put on any of his lordly ways
with _me_!" and here she was submitting meekly, without a word. It
worried her after they had driven away. All the time she was up in her
room, getting ready for lunch, she kept thinking about it.

"I'll just give him to undahstand that it was on grandfathah's account,"
she decided finally. "Instead of my influencing him as Gay expected, it
looks as if _he_ were winding _me_ around his fingah. But he isn't! He
sha'n't! I'll take the lessons, but I'll have no foolishness about it.
I'll surprise him by sticking strictly to business, and I'll set him a
good example of the way to live up to his own family motto."

Mrs. Sherman, who made no objection to the lessons since the old Colonel
approved of them so heartily, was on the front porch with her embroidery
when Leland came up the next morning, the first of July, to give the
first lesson. She smiled to see how energetically Lloyd threw herself
into it, thinking it was a matter of pride with her to show him what
rapid progress she could make.

It certainly was a matter of pride with the Colonel, who enjoyed being
waylaid to hear how beautifully she could count to one hundred or name
the months of the year. It became his habit to take the book, while,
perched on the arm of his chair, she rattled off the vocabulary for the
day's lesson, and reviewed all the others.

"That's right! That's right!" he would say encouragingly. "At this rate
you'll soon be ready for a trip to the Alhambra, and I'm blessed if I
don't take you some of these days. I've always wanted to go."

When Kitty came home from the springs Lloyd insisted on her joining the
class, but she declared she was too far behind to attempt catching up.
Besides she was in charge of affairs at home now, and Elise was to have
a house-party soon. There were half a dozen good reasons why she could
not take the time. The principal one, which she did not give however,
was that it was plain to be seen that Leland was more interested in
studying Lloyd than in teaching her a language, and under such
circumstances, Kitty preferred not to make the third party.

So while Kitty's mornings were filled with her housekeeping duties,
Betty's with her writing and Gay's with her music and plans to keep Lucy
occupied, it gradually came about that Leland spent more and more of his
time at The Locusts. The lessons lasted only an hour, but after that he
usually found some excuse to stay: there was a new song that he wanted
to hear, or a game of tennis, or a stroll down to the post-office.
Sometimes when he had no excuse at all he lingered anyhow, lounging on
the shady porch, and talking of anything that happened to come
uppermost. Then at night he was often there again, either because The
Locusts was the gathering place of the Clan, and a frolic was afoot, or
he went to escort Lloyd and Betty to the Cabin or The Beeches to some
entertainment the other girls had planned.

"My oh! What a buttahfly I'm getting to be!" laughed Lloyd one evening
as she went into her mother's room to have her dress buttoned. "A
hawse-back ride this mawning, a picnic this aftahnoon, and now the
rustic dance in the Mallards' barn to-night. But nevah mind, little
mothah," she added with a hug, as she caught a wistful look on Mrs.
Sherman's face. "It'll all be ovah soon. This is the last summah of my
teens. When I am old and twenty I'll nevah leave yoah side. 'I'll sit on
a cushion and sew a fine seam' and take all the housekeeping cares off
yoah shouldahs as a dutiful daughtah should."

Mrs. Sherman gave her shoulder a caressing pat as she fastened the last
button. "I'm glad to have you go, dear," she answered, "especially to
all the out-door merry-makings. They keep you young and well. Papa Jack
and I will walk over after awhile and look on."

"The Mallard barn dances are always so much fun," said Lloyd, lingering
to give a final touch to her mother's toilet. "Wait! Yoah side combs are
in too high, and yoah collah isn't pinned straight in the back. How did
you evah manage to dress yoahself right befoah I grew up to tend to
you?"

As she made the changes with all a young girl's particularity about
trifles, she went on, "That last one they had three yeahs ago was
lovely. Will you evah forget the way Rob cake-walked with Mrs. Bisbee?
It makes me laugh to this day, whenevah I think of it."

"I suppose Rob will hardly be there to-night," said Mrs. Sherman,
smiling as she recalled the ridiculous appearance he had made. His
cake-walk had been the feature of the evening.

"No, indeed," answered Lloyd. "He's no moah likely to be there than the
man in the moon. I wish he would though. He used to be the life of
everything. We saw him this evening as we drove home from the picnic. He
had just come out from town, and he looked so hot and dusty and ti'ahed
it made me feel bad. He's like a strangah now, didn't stop to speak,
only lifted his hat and turned in at the gate at Oaklea, as if he hadn't
gone on a thousand drives with us. He ought to have been interested in
what we were doing for old times' sake."

Lloyd had not thought of Rob for days, but she was reminded of him many
times that evening, the affair at the Mallards' barn was so much like
the one to which he had taken her three years before. The same old negro
fiddlers furnished the music. The same flickering lantern light made
weird shadows on the rough walls, and the same sweet smell of new hay
filled the place. As the music of the Virginia reel began she thought of
the way Rob had romped through it that other time, and wished she could
see him once more as jolly and care-free as he was then.

"Why can one nevah have two good times exactly alike?" she wondered
wistfully. She was standing near the wide double doors, looking out
across the fields as she thought about it later, recalling how many
things were alike on the two occasions, even the colour of the dress she
wore. She remembered that because Rob had said she looked like an
apple-blossom, and it was rare indeed for him to make such complimentary
speeches. It wasn't best for girls to hear nice things about themselves
often, he said. It made them hard to get along with, too uppity.

The music stopped and Leland Harcourt came to find her. She was looking
so pensively past the gay scene that he bent over her, humming in a low
tone:

    "'What's this dull town to me?
         Robin Adair?
     What was 't I wished to see?
         What wished to hear?'"

She started with a little laugh, blushing slightly because he seemed to
have read her thoughts. "Robin Adair" was one of Mrs. Moore's old names
for Rob, and she _had_ been wishing for him.

Over at Oaklea, Rob sat scowling at a book spread out before him on the
library table. He was thinking of Harcourt as he had seen him on the
front seat beside Lloyd, in his cool-looking white flannels, the very
embodiment of gentlemanly leisure. No doubt she noticed the contrast
between them, he all dusty and dishevelled from his day's work and the
trip home on the hot car. Not that he would change places, not that he
regretted for an instant the part he had to take in the grimy working
world. But the chance encounter had suddenly opened his eyes to all that
he had had to sacrifice for that work. Until now it had not even left
him time to realize how much he had given up. Now to find this stranger
enjoying all that was once his, stung him to envy. He smiled grimly as
he recognized it as envy. He had thought himself free from such a
childish trait. But he could not smile away the feeling. It persisted
till it accomplished more than the old Judge's advice and his mother's
pleadings, that all work and no play was bad for him. Closing his book
he announced his intention of walking over to The Locusts.

As he went up the avenue he heard the distant scraping of fiddles and
the rhythmic beating of feet in the Mallard barn. He had forgotten that
it was the night of the rustic dance.

He was disappointed at finding no one at home but the old Colonel. But
his welcome was so cordial that he stayed even longer than he had
intended. The Colonel always had the latest news of every one, but
to-night he had to talk first of the wonderful progress Lloyd was making
in Spanish, and what a fine fellow that young Harcourt was.

"Didn't like the chap at all at first," he confided. "Thought he was too
much of a confounded foreigner; but I'm a big enough man I hope to
acknowledge a mistake, and I own up I was prejudiced."

When Rob finally rose to start home, the Colonel would not let him go
until he had promised to come again the next night, when Lloyd and Betty
should be at home. Afterwards he regretted having made the promise.
Although he went early Harcourt was already there, seemingly as much at
home as if he were a member of the family. It made Rob feel like a
stranger to see this newcomer usurping the place that he had always
filled in the Sherman household.

It grated on him also to hear Lloyd saying, "Si, señor" and "gracias"
when she addressed Harcourt, and grated still more for Harcourt to turn
to her as he did continually with some aside in Spanish. Never more than
a phrase or a word, and "just for practice," they laughingly explained,
but it seemed to emphasize a tie that had drawn them together,
and--Rob's remoteness.

He left early. Walking slowly down the avenue he thought of the hundreds
of times he had passed under those old locust-trees on sweet starlighted
summer nights like this. What a goodly company of old friends they were!
The kind that never change. He looked up, vaguely grateful for the soft
lisping of leaves above him. They seemed to understand why he was going,
why he could not stay.

Half-way down the avenue he heard the tinkle of Lloyd's harp, and then
her voice beginning to sing. The seat beside the measuring tree was just
ahead and he made his way to it, quietly, on tip-toe almost, that he
might lose no note. But it was an unknown tongue she was singing, a song
that Harcourt had taught her, and Rob could not understand a word. It
was so symbolical of the change that had come between them that a fierce
impulse seized him to rush back to the house and throw the interloper
out of the window. Then he smiled bitterly at his own vehemence. What
right had he to be so savage over her friendship? He was her big brother
only, and even that merely in name, because she had chosen to call him
so in those years that they had been such loyal good chums. It was
little and mean and selfish of him to begrudge her the slightest thing
that would give her pleasure. This man with his fortune, his
accomplishments, his rare social gifts had everything to offer, while
he,--he had not even _time_ to put at her disposal. Time to find bypaths
to happiness for her--

The sweet clear voice sang on, the old locusts rustled softly as the
night wind stirred them. Then the song stopped, and for a long time he
sat staring ahead of him with unseeing eyes. At last he rose, and taking
a step towards the tree beside the bench, passed his hand over the bark,
groping for the notches he knew were there but could not see.

He paused at the one a little higher than his shoulder, and then his
fingers found the four leaf clover he had carved beside it, the last
time Lloyd had stood up to be measured. He could almost see her standing
there again like Elaine, the lily-maid, fair-haired and smiling while he
repeated the charm of the four leaf clover:

    "'Love be true to her--
     Joy draw near to her--
     Fortune find what your
     Gifts can do for her--'"

He had forgotten how the lines went but it made no difference. Anyhow
they voiced what had always been his dearest wish for her, and standing
there in the dark he vowed savagely that any man who stood in the way of
the old charm's coming true, should have him to reckon with.

When he swung off down the path, taking the short cut to Oaklea, his hat
was pulled grimly down over his eyes, and his mouth was set in a firm
hard line. He did not open his books again that night. Lying on the
couch by his open window, he watched the lights at The Locusts shining
through the trees, till the last one went out, and he knew that Harcourt
had gone.




CHAPTER VIII

"SHADOWS OF THE WORLD APPEAR"


THE long July days slipped by, and Lloyd, looking back on them as
Hildegarde looked into her magic glass, saw only pleasant scenes
mirrored in their memory. The fortunate things, the smiling faces, the
pleasant happenings were hers, and for a time even other people's
troubles, those shadows of the world that are always with us, left her
daily outlook undimmed.

Like Hildegarde, too, she went on with her weaving, but wholly
unconscious that the shuttle of her thoughts was shaping her web to fit
the shoulders of the dark-eyed knight who came oftenest. Mrs. Sherman
saw it and was troubled.

"Jack," she said to her husband one afternoon, when he had come out from
town earlier than usual, and they were wandering around the shady
grounds together, planning some improvements, "I'm afraid those Spanish
lessons are a mistake. Lloyd is seeing entirely too much of Mr.
Harcourt. He is here morning, noon and night."

Mr. Sherman gave a quick glance towards the tennis court where the two
were finishing a lively game. "Don't you worry, Elizabeth," was his
placid answer. "It isn't as if she'd never been used to such devotion.
She's never known anything else. Malcolm and Keith used to spend fully
as much time with her, and Rob Moore fairly lived over here."

"Yes, but this is different," protested Mrs. Sherman. "They were mere
boys, and she dominated them, but Leland Harcourt is a man, and an
experienced one socially, and he is dominating her. I can see it in her
quick deference to his opinions, and her evident desire to please him.
Not evident to him, perhaps, but plain enough to me. I've been thinking
that it might be a good thing for us to go to the springs for awhile or
to the sea-shore or some place where she'd meet other people. In a quiet
little country place like this a man like Leland Harcourt looms up big
on a young girl's horizon; a girl just out of school, eager for new
interests. It isn't wise in us to allow her to be restricted just to his
society, when we could so easily give her the safe-guard of contrasts."

Mr. Sherman looked down at his wife with an indulgent smile.

"Don't you worry," he repeated. "Lloyd will do a lot of romantic
day-dreaming probably, but she has my 'yard-stick' and I have her
promise."

"But Jack, I verily believe the child thinks he measures up to all your
requirements. And really there is nothing one can urge against his
character. It's more a matter of temperament. I am sure she couldn't be
happy with him. She's just at the romantic age now to be very much
impressed with that kind of a man. If she were older she would see his
shallowness--his lack of purpose, his intense selfishness. I don't think
that we ought to shut our eyes to the possible outcome of this constant
companionship we are allowing."

"Well," he answered hesitatingly, slow to acknowledge his wife's
distrust of Lloyd's judgment, yet quick to see the wisdom of her point
of view. "Maybe you are right. But," he added wistfully, "I had hoped to
keep her home this summer. She has been away at school so long--and
she'll be in town so much next winter if she makes her début. Wait till
I have had a talk with her before you plan any trips."

"But don't you see," urged Mrs. Sherman, "it is something too
intangible to discuss. To speak to her about it now, to make any
opposition to him at all, may quicken her interest in him and make her
champion his cause. That would be fatal, and yet it's just as dangerous
to wait. Love at that age is like a fog. It comes creeping up so
gradually that you don't realize what is enveloping you, till you're
completely lost in it, and all the rest of the world shut out."

"You speak from experience?" he said teasingly.

"You know very well," she confessed laughingly, "what a befogged state
_I_ was in. All papa's breathing out of 'threatening and slaughter'
didn't make the slightest difference. I was blind and deaf to everything
but you. And I'd want Lloyd to be the same," she added hastily, "if you
were as unreasonable as papa was then. But the circumstances are too
different to be compared. I'm simply warning you that the Little
Colonel's name was not lightly given. She has not only all my
determination in her makeup, but her grandfather's as well."

Here the gardener met them, and the conversation dropped. The next half
hour was spent in consultation over some changes to be made in the
conservatory.

When they went back to the house Leland Harcourt had gone, and Lloyd was
just stepping into Doctor Shelby's buggy, which was drawn up in front of
the house. The old doctor waited for them to come within hearing
distance before he leaned out and called:

"I'm just borrowing the Little Colonel for awhile. There's a case over
at Rollington that needs the attention of her King's Daughters Circle,
and I'm taking her over to investigate it. We'll be home before dark."

"All right," called Mr. Sherman, waving his hat as Lloyd looked back at
them with a smile and a flutter of her handkerchief. During the winter
that Lloyd had joined the Circle, and in the summer vacations following,
it had been a matter of frequent occurrence for the old doctor to take
her with him on such errands. Remembering how interested Lloyd had
become in many of the cases, Mrs. Sherman breathed a sigh of
thankfulness, hoping that this might prove to be one that would enlist
her sympathies and occupy so much of her time that it would make a
serious break in the Spanish lessons.

It had been a happy afternoon for Lloyd. If she had stopped and tried to
recall what made it so, she could not have mentioned any particular
thing. To be young and well and filled with the same glow that made the
summer day a joy was enough, but to feel that some one whose opinion she
valued very much found her charming, and said so with every glance of
his dark eyes, was more than enough. It made her cup of happiness
complete and brimmed it over.

The doctor was pouring out a tale of somebody's woes, but the trace of a
smile lingered on her lips as she made a polite attempt to listen. She
could not quite shut out the thought of that last game of tennis, and
the trivial pleasantries that had gone to make up the sum of her great
content. There was a dreamy, far-away look in her eyes as she listened.
The Spanish serenade that Leland Harcourt had sung before he left kept
repeating itself over and over, a sort of undercurrent to what the
doctor was saying. She beat time to it with her finger-tips on the side
of the buggy. Once it rose so insistently that she lost what the doctor
was saying, and came to herself with a start when a familiar name
arrested her attention.

"Ned Bannon's wife!" she repeated in astonishment. "You suahly can't
mean that it's Ida Shane who's sick ovah in that tumbledown cottage of
the McCarty's!"

"I surely do," he answered. "She didn't want to come back to this part
of the country, goodness knows. She remembers what a commotion it raised
when she eloped from the Seminary with Ned, five years ago. But Ned has
scarcely drawn a sober breath for the last year. She's sure of getting
needlework here, and with little Wardo to consider there was nothing for
her to do but put her pride in her pocket and come."

"Little Wardo!" breathed Lloyd wonderingly. The ride seemed full of
surprises.

"Yes, she has a little son about four years old, I judge. And it is on
his account that I have asked the help of the King's Daughters. He'll
have to be taken away from her till she's better, for she is morbidly
sensitive about keeping Ned's failings from him. She has never allowed
him to find out that his father is a drunkard. She makes a hero of him
to the little fellow. Seems to think that he'll blame her for giving him
such a father by marrying a man whom she had been warned would bring her
nothing but trouble and disgrace. She's desperately ill, and of course
in her weak condition she magnifies the matter. It has become a mania
with her."

"Poah Violet!" exclaimed Lloyd in distress, her thoughts flying back to
the scene in the school orchard five years ago, when watching the
glimmer of the pearl on Ida's white hand in the moonlight she had been
thrilled by her whisper: "He says that's what my life means to him--a
pearl; and that my influence can make him the man I want him to be. Oh,
Princess! I'd give my life to keep him straight!"

Not even an echo of the serenade was in her memory now. Her knowledge of
Ida's nearness seemed to bring her old school-friend actually before
her: the faint odour of violets, the shy glance of her appealing violet
eyes under the long lashes, the bewitching dimple at the corner of her
mouth, the flash of her rings, the sweep of her long skirts, the soft
hair gleaming under the big-plumed picture hat, more than all the air of
romance and mystery that surrounded her because of the pearl and the
secret engagement to her "Edwardo."

"I hadn't intended for her to see you," said the doctor, when her
exclamations and questions revealed to him the intimacy that had once
existed between them. "But under the circumstances it will be the best
thing I can do. I'll go in first and prepare her for the meeting,
however. She thinks she hasn't a friend left on earth, on account of her
unhappy marriage. Everybody warned her against it."

The front door stood open, and Lloyd sat down on the broken step to
wait. It seemed impossible that she was going to find Ida, the
embodiment of daintiness and refinement, in this dilapidated old place.
The whitewash had long ago dropped in scales from the rough walls. The
window-panes were broken, the shutters sagging, half the pickets off the
fence. Not a spear of grass ventured up in the barren yard, where a rank
unpruned peach-tree struggled for its life in the baked earth. The house
stood so near the road that the thick summer dust rolled in
suffocatingly whenever a vehicle passed.

"How can people exist in such an awful desolate, forsaken spot?" she
wondered, looking around with a shudder of disgust. That Ida, dainty
beauty-loving Ida, who scorned everything that was common and coarse,
should be lying inside in that dark room was more than she could
believe.

A wagon rattled by, and she put her handkerchief up to her face, stifled
by the cloud of dust that rose in its wake. When she ventured to take
it down again and draw a long breath, a chubby, barefooted child was
standing in the path in front of her, regarding her curiously. The wagon
made so much noise that she had not heard his bare feet pattering around
the house. She gave a little start of surprise, then smiled at him, for
he was an attractive little fellow, despite the fact that his face was
smeared with the remains of the bread and jam he had just been enjoying
at one of the neighbours, and his gingham apron was in rags. He had
caught it on the barb wire fence as he climbed through.

As he smiled back at her shyly from under his long lashes, Lloyd's
interest quickened, for there was no mistaking the likeness of those
violet eyes and the dimple that came at the corner of his cupid's bow of
a mouth. They were so like Ida's that she smiled and said confidently,
"You're Wardo. Aren't you!"

He nodded gravely, then after another long silent scrutiny, turned away
to pour the sand out of the old tin can he was carrying, in a pile under
the peach-tree. If it had not been for the jam and the dirt Lloyd would
have caught him up and kissed him, he was such a dear little thing, with
a thatch of short golden curls. But her fastidious dislike of touching
anything dirty made her draw back. It was well for the furtherance of
their acquaintance that she did so. He was not accustomed to caresses
from strangers. He accepted her presence on the door-step without
question, and presently, as the moments passed and she made no movement
towards him, he went up to her with friendly curiosity.

"Is you got a sand-pile to your house?" he asked.

"No," she confessed, feeling that he would consider her lacking on that
account and that she must hasten to mention other attractions. "But I
have a red and green bird that can talk, and a little black pony named
'Tarbaby.' It's so little that there's nobody at my house now small
enough to ride it. So it stays all day long in the field and eats
grass."

"I'm little enough to ride it," he began confidently.

Just then the doctor came out, and she sprang up, her heart throbbing.
"I'm going now for the nurse," he said in a low tone. "She's due on the
next train. Keep her as quiet as possible. Of course you'll have to let
her free her mind, but promise her almost anything to soothe her. I'll
be back in quarter of an hour."

Frightened at being left alone with such a weight of responsibility
thrust upon her, Lloyd tiptoed into the house. In the dim light she
almost stumbled over the cot on which Ned Bannon lay in a drunken
stupor, and her first glance at the bed beyond made her draw back in
dismay. She never would have recognized the white face on the pillow as
Ida's, had it not been for the appealing eyes turned towards her.

Five years of poverty and illness and neglect had changed the pretty
little school-girl into a faded, care-worn woman. She had been crying
ever since she was taken sick, and now was so weak and hysterical that
she caught at Lloyd with a cry, and clung to her sobbing.

"Oh, it kills me to have you find me this way!" she gasped, "when I've
tried so long to hide what we've come to. But I'm glad you've come, for
the baby's sake! Oh, Lloyd, what's going to become of my little Wardo!"

It was several minutes before she could talk coherently, and then she
began to sob out the story of her married life, her miserable failure to
reform Ned. Lloyd tried to stop her presently, thinking she was
becoming delirious, but she might as well have tried to stop a high
tide.

"Oh, I have been so proud!" she sobbed. "I couldn't tell anybody. I
couldn't tell you now if I wasn't afraid that I might die, like that
poor woman across the street last night. She's left five little
children. But I can't leave my little Wardo like that!" she broke out
desperately. "I _know_ he has inherited Ned's awful appetite. I must
stay and help him fight it, _for it's all my fault_. I gave him such a
father. A father that he can never be proud of! A father that will be
only a disgrace to him! Oh, why didn't somebody warn me that it was not
only a husband I was choosing but my little Wardo's father! Nobody ever
told me _that_, and I was so young I never thought of any one but
myself. And now the poor little innocent soul will have to suffer for it
all his life long!"

She was throwing herself about so wildly that Lloyd was frightened, and
rose from her chair to call one of the neighbours. But she could not
break away. Ida caught at her dress and held her fast in her frenzied
clasp.

"But I tell you I won't let him grow up to be like that!" she cried with
her eyes glaring wildly at the drunken man on the cot across the room.
"I'll kill him with my own hands first, while he is little and good. God
would understand, wouldn't he? He couldn't blame me for trying to save
my baby! But if he did I'd have to do it anyway. I'd have to do it and
take the punishment. I can't have my little Wardo grow up to be like
_that_."

The sound of his name brought the child to the door. He came pattering
in, and climbing up on the bed beside his mother, stroked her face with
his dirty little dimpled hand. The soft touch quieted Ida in an instant,
and with an effort to speak calmly she looked up at Lloyd.

"The doctor said the baby must go away for awhile, for fear of the
fever. But I can't give him up to just anybody, Lloyd. The neighbours
have been good and kind, but I'm afraid he might find out from some of
the children about Ned--you know. But with you--Oh, Lloyd, would it be
asking too much if--"

She stopped with her question half uttered, but the imploring look in
her eyes was a prayer that Lloyd could not resist, and she held out her
arms toward the little figure cuddled up on the bed.

"I'll take him till you're better," she promised impulsively.

The tears welled up in Ida's eyes again. She was so weak the least thing
started them.

"He's never been away from me a single night in his life," she said
brokenly. "I couldn't give him up to anybody but you." Then seeing the
frightened look that crept into the child's face as he listened to the
conversation which he but half understood, she wiped her eyes and smiled
at him tremulously.

"Dear little son, you want to help mother get well, don't you, lamb?
Then go with mother's dearest friend for awhile. She'll take care of you
while the good doctor makes me well. And she'll tell you stories and
make you have such a happy time."

"And let you ride on the black pony," broke in Lloyd eagerly, anxious to
clear away the troubled pucker on the child's face that came at mention
of a separation.

"An' hear the wed and gween bird talk!" he added himself, his face
lighting up at the thought. Then he laid his plump little hand on Ida's
hot cheek to compel her attention. It was a gesture she loved, and she
kissed his fingers passionately as he said with an eager voice, "She has
a bird that can talk, muv'ah. I'll go and hear what it says an' n'en
I'll come back an' tell you."

Evidently his idea of separation was based on the length of the
neighbourhood visits he had made, and he accepted Lloyd's invitation
willingly, expecting a speedy return.

"Let's go wite away, Dea'st Fwend," he exclaimed, wriggling down off the
bed. "I'll get my hat."

If anything had been needed to complete Lloyd's surrender to the little
fellow's charms, it was the sweet way in which he gave her the title
"Dearest Friend." That was what his mother had called her, and he
thought it was her name. She caught him up and kissed him, despite the
jam streaks and the dirt.

"Come on and have yoah face washed and yoah curls brushed, so we'll be
all ready when the buggy comes back," she said, hurrying to make him
presentable before his mood could change.

As she gathered his clothes together and packed them for the short
journey in a dress box which she found under the bed, it made an ache
grip her throat to see how Ida had thrown the shield of her mother-love
around him in every way possible. There was no mark of poverty here.
She had cut up her own clothes, relics of a happier time, to make the
little linen suits that were so pretty and becoming. No child in the
Valley was better clad, or looked so much like a little aristocrat, as
long as she was able to give him her daily attention.

He was so accustomed to being washed and brushed and dressed that he
made no objection to what most children of that age consider an
unnecessary process, and when Lloyd went about it with unpractised
fingers, he gravely corrected her mistakes, and laughed when she made a
play of the buttonholes being hungry mouths, that swallowed the buttons
in a hurry. Never in her life had she exerted herself so much to be
entertaining, for she wanted to take him away without a scene. She
wanted, too, for him to look his best, that he might win his own way at
The Locusts. She thought with a trifle of uneasiness that her impulsive
act might not meet her family's entire approval.

Ida's separation from him was a painful one, for she realized her
condition, and knew that it was possible that this might be her last
sight of him. As Lloyd turned away with her parting cry ringing in her
ears, "Oh, be good to him! Be good to him!" a great tenderness sprang up
in her heart for the child who put his hand in hers so trustingly, and
trotted away beside her obediently at his mother's bidding. At the cot
he stopped to clamber up and kiss the red face, burrowed down in the
pillows in a sodden sleep. "My poor farvah's sick too," he explained
looking up at her, as if bespeaking sympathy for him also.

Once in the buggy, while they waited for the doctor to unfasten the
hitch-rein, he reached up and put his hand on her cheek in his baby
fashion to ask her a question. The touch brought the tears to her eyes,
it was so confiding, and she was still so shaken by the scene she had
just witnessed. In a great throb of tenderness for the helpless little
body given over to her care, she drew him closer, with a hasty kiss on
the top of his curly head.

"Dea'st Fwend," he said, smiling up at her as if he understood the
reason of her sudden caress. Then he cuddled his head against her
shoulder in a satisfied way, saying, "Tell me again what the wed and
gween bird says."

As they drove in at the entrance gate to The Locusts, Lloyd recalled an
experience she had not thought of in years; an autumn day, when only a
baby herself, not yet six, she had been left to make her way alone up
this same avenue. She had never spent a night away from her mother, and
she was to stay a week alone with her grandfather, who did not know how
to sing her to sleep and kiss her eye-lids down so she wouldn't be
afraid of the black shadows in the corners. Here by this very gate she
had stood, assailed by such a great ache of loneliness and homesickness
that she was sure she would die if she had to endure it another moment.
And there was the spot where, rustling around in the dead leaves, Fritz
had found the little gray glove her mother had dropped when she stooped
to kiss her good-bye.

As she remembered how she had carried that glove, all week, rolled up in
a little wad in her pocket, to help her to be good and not to cry, she
resolved that Wardo should not have the same experience if any effort of
hers could prevent it. She would devote her time to him night and day
and keep him so happily employed, there would be no time for "the sorry
feelin's" that had been her childish undoing. There was no care or
accustomed tenderness he should miss.

It was nearly dark when she reached home, and so afraid was she that the
nightfall itself would make Wardo homesick, that she began to provide
for his entertainment even before she made any explanation to her
astonished family.

[Illustration: "FOR ONCE THE RED AND GREEN BIRD WAS ON ITS GOOD
BEHAVIOUR."]

"Oh, Papa Jack," she called. "Please find the parrot right away for
Wardo to see, then I'll explain everything."

For once the red and green bird was on its good behaviour, and began to
show off as soon as it was brought to the front. While Wardo watched it,
wide-eyed and absorbed, Lloyd gave an excited and tearful account of her
visit to Ida. The old Colonel said something about the fever and the
danger of infection, but when she had finished her story nobody else had
the heart to show displeasure at what she had done.

"And I won't let him be a trouble to anybody!" she added. "I'll take
care of him every bit myself, and keep him out of the way."

As Mrs. Sherman watched her leading the child up-stairs, talking to him
at every step to keep his thoughts diverted from home, and then heard
her giving orders to Walker about her old high chair and little white
crib to be brought down from the attic, she turned to Mr. Sherman with a
sigh of relief.

"She's found her own antidote for the Spanish lessons, Jack. We won't
have to go away to the springs or the mountains now, I'm sure."




CHAPTER IX

MORE SHADOWS


FROM that first night, Wardo had the entire household at his feet. Lloyd
scarcely touched her own dinner in her anxiety to anticipate his wants.
He was very near tears sometimes, when his furtive glances around the
table showed only strange faces, but he was "a game little chap" as the
Colonel said, and "a credit to whoever had taught him his manners."

He could not be induced to speak save in whispers, when Lloyd put a
protecting arm around the high chair where he sat, and with an indulgent
smile leaned over with her ear almost touching his lips. Before the
dinner was over he fell asleep, worn out by the unusual excitement of
the day, his curly head laid confidingly on "Dea'st Fwend's" shoulder.

"Sh!" whispered Lloyd warningly to the coloured man who came in to
change the plates for dessert. "Wait a minute. Carry him up-stairs
first, please, Papa Jack. If I can get him undressed without waking him
he'll miss one homesick crying spell anyhow."

Leland Harcourt came just as she had accomplished the task, and Betty
tiptoed into the room to tell her. Lloyd looked down at the little
white-gowned figure in the crib, and shook her head as it stirred
restlessly. "I'll stay with him," offered Betty.

"No, I must wait till I'm suah he's sound asleep. You explain to Mistah
Harcourt, please, and I'll come down aftah awhile. Oh, Betty! Isn't he a
darling? It's going to be moah fun taking care of him than dressing
dolls used to be!"

It wasn't so much fun next morning, however, when he cried to be taken
to his mother. Every sob that shook the little shoulders tore Lloyd's
heart also, for remembering the violence of her own childish grieving,
she put herself into Wardo's place so completely that she cried too.
Then everybody in the house rose to the occasion. Papa Jack brought out
Tarbaby, and walked him up and down the avenue as long as Wardo was
pleased to sit in the saddle. Mrs. Sherman took him to the stables to
see half a dozen gray kittens that had made their home in the hay, and
Walker carried him pick-a-back to look at the calves.

After that the old Colonel unsheathed his sword and got out his spurs,
and started to tell the bloodiest battle tales he knew, and when they
did not meet with the approval he expected, he actually invented a game
of bear, which they played in his den. They played it till Wardo began
shrieking with thrills of real fear at the fearsome growling and the big
fur gloves thrust at him from behind the leather couch. He grew so
nervous and excited that the Colonel was at a loss to know how to calm
the whirlwind he had unintentionally stirred up.

It was Betty who came to the rescue. She led him down to the orchard,
and taking him on her lap in the old swing, swung him so high up into
the top of the apple-tree that they could look over and see the eggs in
a blue-bird's nest. Then little by little she stopped their swinging,
till presently they were swaying very gently back and forth near the
ground, and she had charmed him into quietness with one of the old tales
that she used to tell Davy, about the elves who live in the buttercups
and ride far miles on the bumblebees.

Glancing up towards the house, she saw Leland Harcourt mounting the
steps. It was the hour for Lloyd's lesson. So although she had intended
to spend the morning outlining a magazine story which she had in mind,
she took a fresh grip on the swing rope, and began another tale.

That was the way Wardo's entertainment went on for the next few days. He
was not allowed an idle moment in which to think of going home. So what
with all these amusements and the novelty of constant attention from his
elders, it was not long before he developed into a veritable little
tyrant, demanding attention every moment of his waking hours. But when
her unremitting service grew irksome Lloyd had only to think of Ida,
tossing helpless and delirious at the mercy of the wasting fever. Her
daily visits to the cottage kept her in full realization of the
seriousness of the case, and a deeper feeling of tenderness swept over
her whenever she came back to Wardo after one of these visits, for each
time she knew that the dreaded crisis was nearer, and she could not bear
to think of his being left motherless.

"It will just kill him!" she thought with tears in her eyes, as she
watched the pitiful quivering of his mouth and the manly attempt to
choke back his sobs, whenever Ida's name was mentioned. So to make sure
that he was happily employed she took him wherever she went, except on
that one short drive which she made daily to Rollington. When she and
Betty spent the day at The Beeches or the Cabin, he was one of the
party. When Miss Marks had another expedition to finish her Garden
Fancies, he was included in the group, and a charming picture he made,
as with a butterfly net in his hand, he stooped to point to the figures
on the old sun-dial, that marked the flight of the happy summer.

It was from this expedition that they drove back one evening in the
early August twilight. He had been asleep most of the way home, but
roused up as the carriage turned in at the gate. Betty, leaning forward
in her seat, drew a long breath.

"Oh, smell the lilies!" she exclaimed, looking across the lawn to where
they stood, like tall white ghosts in the twilight. "How heavenly sweet!
Such a delicious ending to such a nice day. Do you know, Lloyd, I've
been feeling all the way home as if I were going to hear from my book
to-night. The publishers have had plenty of time to read it since I sent
it. I feel it in my bones that there'll be a letter waiting for me."

"_How_ do you feel fings wif your bones, Betty?" asked Wardo, sleepily
raising his curly head from Lloyd's shoulder.

"Oh, I couldn't make you understand," she answered. "It's just a sort of
happy flutter all through you that tells you something nice is going to
happen."

"What's flutter?" asked the tireless questioner, but Betty paid no heed.
The carriage had reached the steps, and with a spring she was out,
calling eagerly as she stepped into the broad path of light streaming
across the porch from the hall door, "Any mail for me, godmother?"

"Nothing but a package," answered Mrs. Sherman, coming out to meet them.
"And it will keep. Better run on in and eat your dinner first. Cindy has
been keeping it hot for you all."

But Betty could not wait. As she darted into the hall Mrs. Sherman
turned to Lloyd, who was half dragging, half lifting the sleepy Wardo up
the steps.

"Poor little girl," she said in a low tone. "I wanted to put off her
disappointment as long as possible, and not spoil her happy day with
such an ending. Her manuscript has come back from the publishers."

"Oh, mothah!" exclaimed Lloyd in distress. "You don't mean that they've
refused it! They suahly couldn't have done _that_! Maybe they've just
sent it back for her to make some changes in it."

Betty's voice in the door stopped her. As long as she lived, Lloyd never
again smelled the odour of August lilies when they were heavy with dew,
that she did not see the tragic misery of Betty's white face as it
appeared that moment in the light of the hall lamp.

"They've sent it back, godmother," she said in a low even tone. "It
wasn't good enough. It's all a miserable mistake to think that I can
write, for I put the very best of myself into this and it is a failure."

"No! No!" began Lloyd, but Betty would not wait for any attempted
comfort. "I don't want any dinner," she said, then with her mouth
twitching piteously as she fought back the tears, she ran up-stairs, and
they heard the door close and the key turn in the lock.

Nobody ever knew what went on behind that locked door, for Betty was as
quiet in her griefs as she was in her joy and made no audible moan. She
threw herself across the foot of the bed and lay there staring out of
the window in the hopelessness of utter defeat. The katydids shrilling
in the Locusts seemed to fill the night with an unbearable discord. She
put her hands over her ears to shut out the hateful sound. It seemed to
her that nothing mattered any more. As she slowly recalled all her
months of painstaking work, the keen pleasure that each hour of it had
afforded her was turned into bitterness by the thought that it had
proved a failure.

Only once before had she felt such hopelessness. That was at the first
house-party, when she thought she was doomed to be blind. They had
brought her the newspaper containing her first published poem. It was
called "Night," and as they guided her finger over the page that it
might rest proudly on the place where her name was printed, she had
faltered, "It's going to be such a long night, and there are no stars in
this one!"

Now the outlook seemed even more hopeless, bereft of the star of her
great hope. The ambition to be an author had been a part of her so long,
that it seemed even more indispensable than her eye-sight.

The slow hot tears began to drop down on her pillow after awhile, tears
of mortification as well as disappointment. The girls would have to
know. She had been foolish to make such a parade of her attempt. She
should have waited. But then she had been so _sure_ that her story was
a good one. That was the hardest part to bear, that she had been so
mistaken. It would have been easier, she thought bitterly, if her
rebuffs had come earlier; if some of her first contributions had been
returned. But the way had been made so easy for her. Her very first
poems had been accepted, printed, praised. Everybody had predicted
success, everybody expected great things of her, even old Bishop
Chartley. The girls at school had openly proclaimed her as a genius, the
teachers had praised every effort and urged her to greater, the whole
Valley looked upon her as one set apart by a special gift.

Was it any wonder, she asked herself, that she had come to believe in
her own ability. It was as if she had been urged down a flowery path by
each one she met, to find that every guide was mistaken, and that the
way they pointed out ended in a dismal slough of disappointment.

Presently she heard Wardo's little feet on the stairs, pattering up to
bed, and his voice raised in his ceaseless questioning; then a little
later Lloyd's voice singing him to sleep. After that there was the sound
below of people coming and going, Leland Harcourt's laugh and the scrape
of wheels on the gravelled drive.

She felt a dull throb of gratitude that the family left her alone.

A long time after she heard the closing and locking of doors, and then
steps again on the stairs. Some one stopped outside her door.

"Good-night, Betty deah."

"Good-night," she answered in a voice which she tried to keep steady,
but there was a sob in it, and divining that the kindest thing would be
not to notice it, Lloyd choked back the word of sympathy she longed to
speak, and went on to her room.

Nearly an hour after Betty got up, and lighting her lamp, sat down at
the desk where the rejected manuscript lay. Turning it over listlessly,
she read a paragraph here and there, trying to see it through the eyes
of the publisher who had returned it. If he had sent merely a printed
notice of refusal, such as she had been told was customary, stating
impersonally that it was returned with regret because unavailable, she
would have started it off again at daybreak to another place, knowing
that what does not fill the special need of one firm may be seized with
alacrity by another. But this man had taken the trouble to explain why
it was unavailable.

Now, in the light of that explanation, she wondered with burning cheeks
how she could have thought for one instant that it was good. She could
see, herself, that it was crude and childish and ineffectual; not the
style in which it was written. Betty was sure of her ability there. She
was as conscious that her diction and composition measured up to the
best standards, as an athlete is conscious of his strength. It was her
view-point of life that had amused the great publisher. He hadn't
ridiculed it in words, but she felt his covert smile at her schoolgirl
attempt to deal with the world's big problems, and the knowledge that he
had been amused cut her like a knife.

Pushing the package aside, she took out the last volume of her diary,
and from force of habit made an entry, the record of the return of her
manuscript. "It has come back to me, the little bark that the girls
launched so gaily, with ceremony and good wishes. It has come back a
shipwreck! It was almost easier to face blindness than it is to face
this failure. How can I give up this hope that has grown with my growth
till it means more than everything else in the world to me? How can I
live all the rest of my life without it? Somehow for years I have felt
that the Lord wanted me to write. The feeling was like the King's call
to Edryn, and I have gone on answering it as he did:

                               "'Oh list!
    Thou heart and hand of mine, keep tryst,
               Keep tryst or die!'

"Of course it would be folly for me to go on now, when it has been
proved beyond all doubt that I am not able to keep the great tryst
worthily, and yet--life seems so empty with this one high hope and
purpose taken out of it, that I am not brave enough to face it
cheerfully."

It had long been a habit of Betty's, formed in the early days at the
Cuckoo's Nest, to comfort herself when things went wrong by imagining
how much worse they might have been. Now there was a drop of consolation
in the fact that she had never displayed her pride in her book to any
but the girls. It had been a temptation to show it to her godmother and
Papa Jack and the Colonel, especially after the girls had applauded it
so enthusiastically; but the wish for them to see it at its best had
made her withhold it in its manuscript form. The climax of her triumph
was to be when she placed in their hands a real, full-fledged book.
Their criticism might have spared her the humiliation of a rejected
manuscript, but she acknowledged to herself that it was easier to have
the sentence passed on it by a stranger than by the three whose opinion
she valued most.

Tiptoeing noiselessly around the room in order not to disturb any one at
that late hour, she undressed slowly, and creeping into bed sobbed
herself to sleep. Betty had always been a sensible little soul, taking
her small troubles like a philosopher, and next morning, when she was
awakened by the first bird-calls and lay watching the light creep up the
wall, the old childish habit of thought asserted itself, bringing an
unexpected balm to her sore heart. She had always loved allegories. At
the Cuckoo's Nest she had helped herself over all the rough places in
her road by imagining that she was Christian in "Pilgrim's Progress,"
and that no matter how hard a time she was having then, the House
Beautiful and the Delectable Mountains and the City of the Shining Ones
lay just ahead.

Now in her greater trouble it was the allegory of Edryn that brought
comfort, because he, too, had heard the King's call and striven to keep
tryst, and she remembered that when he knelt to receive his knighthood,
something else besides pearls and diamonds flashed on his vestment above
his heart, to form the letters "semper fidelis."

"_An amethyst glowed on his breast in purple splendour to mark his
patient meeting with Defeat!_"

"Maybe without that amethyst he couldn't have spelled all the motto
perfectly," thought Betty. She sat up in bed, her face alight with the
inspiration of the thought. She had met defeat and she had fallen into a
grievous Dungeon of Disappointment, but she needn't stay in it. She
sprang out of bed echoing Edryn's words: "Full well I know that Heaven
always finds a way to help the man who helps himself, and even dungeon
walls must harbour help for him who boldly grasps the first thing that
he sees and makes it serve him!"

It was a brave way to begin the day, and it carried her over the first
part of it so cheerfully that Mrs. Sherman began to think that she had
overestimated Betty's disappointment. It surely could not have been as
overwhelming as she imagined. She did not know how many times that day
Betty's courage failed her. Edryn's high-sounding words seemed like a
hollow mockery and she brooded over the failure till she began to grow
morbid and ultra-sensitive.

Late that afternoon Mrs. Sherman met her in the back hall with the
manuscript in her hands. She was on her way to put it in the kitchen
stove. Promptly rescuing it, Mrs. Sherman finally obtained her
reluctant consent to let her read it.

"It is your right," said Betty bitterly, "no matter how much it
humiliates me. You have done everything for me, lavished everything on
me as if I were really your daughter, and I have disappointed you at
every turn. I couldn't be the brilliant social success you hoped for, it
was useless to try. And I couldn't be the success in literature you had
a right to expect, though I did try that with all my soul, mind and
strength. I've been thinking about it all day, and I made up my mind at
last, that I'd burn up that miserable story that I wasted so many months
on, and then I'd go to you and tell you that under the circumstances it
would be better for me to go away, and not be an expense to you any
longer. As long as there was a prospect of my amounting to something
some day that would make you proud of me, that would repay you in part
for all you've done, I didn't mind deepening my obligation to you, but
_now_--"

She turned to the window to hide her face, but the next instant she
found herself sitting on the top stair with her head on her godmother's
shoulder, listening to such loving remonstrances that they should have
driven away the last vestige of her bitter self-condemnation. It did
help wonderfully to hear that her godmother and Papa Jack were not
disappointed in _her_ though grieved for her disappointment; that they
loved her for her own dear little self alone, and not for the things
they hoped she would achieve, and that they couldn't let her go away,
for nobody could ever fill the place of their dear little daughter
Betty.

She wiped her eyes after awhile and smiled like an April day, but she
still persisted that she must go away somewhere and teach if only to
prove that she was good for something.

Much troubled by her evident distress, Mrs. Sherman finally went to talk
the matter over with the old Colonel. Mr. Sherman was away from home.
Several days after she called Betty into her room.

"Papa has read your manuscript," she said, "and he thinks it would be a
good thing to let you have your own way, and go off somewhere for
awhile. He says that in his opinion your writing shows unusual promise,
and that its only lack is the lack of nearly all young writers, your
ignorance of life. You must know more of the world before you can have a
message for it that it will stop to listen to. You must live and grow
and gain experience, and he thinks the best way for you to do all that,
is to depend on your own resources for awhile, and that the kindest
thing we can do is to open the cage and give the little bird a chance to
try its own wings. It will never learn to fly as long as we keep it
hedged about so carefully.

"He finally convinced me by quoting that legend of 'Camelback Mountain'
to me. He says you are like Shapur now, a vendor of salt who as yet can
only follow in the train of others--write what has already been written.
You haven't _the wares_ with which to gain a royal entrance to the City
of your Desire. You need some desert of waiting in which to learn the
secret of Omar's alchemy."

"I know," said Betty. "I know now what my writing lacks--the attar that
gained him his royal entrance." She quoted softly, "'And no man fills
his crystal vase with it until he has first been pricked by the world's
disappointments and bowed by its tasks.'"

"Oh, Betty, my dear little girl," said Mrs. Sherman taking the earnest
face between her hands and looking down fondly into the trusting brown
eyes raised to hers. "I suppose it's true, but I can't help wanting to
save you from the pricks and the burdens. Still I won't stand in your
way. Go ahead, little Shapur, and may the golden gates swing wide for
you, for I know you'll force them open some day, with the filling of
your crystal vase."

A quarter of an hour later Betty was hurrying down the road in happy
haste, a telegram in her hand for Warwick Hall. It was to Madam Chartley
asking if she knew of any vacant position for teachers, in any of the
schools of her acquaintance.




CHAPTER X

BY THE SILVER YARD-STICK


WITH her days shadowed by anxiety over Ida's illness, the care and
responsibility of Wardo and her sympathy for Betty's disappointment,
Lloyd still found one bright spot, untouched by other people's troubles.
If, like the old sun-dial at Warwick Hall, she had taken for her motto:
"I only mark the hours that shine," those hours when Leland Harcourt
came to teach her Spanish were the ones that would have been numbered.

If she had felt that he regarded it as a bore, or that it cost him the
slightest effort, she would have dropped the study immediately; but when
he made it plain that it was the chief interest of his days, and the one
thing that made his summer in the Valley endurable, she could not help
being flattered by his assertions, and exerted herself all the more to
make the hour a pleasant one.

It was an agreeable sensation to know that she could interest a man who
had known so many interests; that it was she who held him in
Lloydsboro; that every turn of her head, every inflection of her voice,
every phase of her varying moods had a charm for him. It made her tingle
with satisfaction when she realized that she had justified Gay's
confidence in her power, but sometimes after he had gone she felt that
she was not exerting it to the extent she had promised. She wasn't
"keying him up to any higher pitch." She wasn't inspiring him with the
ambition which his family seemed to think was all that was necessary to
make him capable of any achievement. The idea of her influencing him did
not seem as preposterous and ridiculous as it had the first few weeks of
their acquaintance, but somehow it did not seem so necessary. Sometimes
she wondered if the "sweet doing nothing" that Gay said was in his blood
had not affected her also. Maybe that was why she liked his very
indolence, and forgave in him what she would have condemned in any other
chronic idler. Maybe he was influencing _her_.

"But he sha'n't!" she declared to herself when the thought first
startled her, and to prove that he hadn't she seized the first
opportunity which came in her way to take him to task. His signet ring
bore the same crest that was on the silver ladle, and he used it one
morning to seal a note for her. With a significant glance in its
direction she asked saucily, "Señor Tarrypin, when are you going to put
your family motto into actual use? When are you going to begin striving
till you ovahcome--till you do something really worth while in the
world?"

With the question came the quick remembrance of a winter day by the
churchyard stile, and Malcolm's boyish voice protesting earnestly--"I'll
be anything you want me to be, Lloyd." And then like a flash came that
other scene and Phil's pleading voice, "I say it in all humility, Lloyd,
this little bit of turquoise kept me 'true blue.'"

If she had expected any such earnestness in Leland's reply she was soon
disillusioned, for with an amused side-glance at her, as if he found
this serious mood the most diverting of all, he said indifferently:

"Oh--_mañana_."

"To-morrow!" she translated quickly. "But to-morrow never comes."

"Then neither need the effort."

"But without the effort--the striving," she persisted, looking down at
the imprint of the tiny dagger on the seal, "there never will be any
crown."

He shrugged his shoulders carelessly. "What's the odds, when one doesn't
care for a crown?"

"You're just plain lazy!" she cried, provoked that her effort to inspire
him had met with such a reception.

He smiled as if she had paid him the greatest of compliments, then sat
up with an air of interest.

"This is a topic we've never struck before," he said lightly. "It's like
coming across an inviting bypath we've never travelled over. Now suppose
you tell me just what is your ideal way for a man to spend his life in
order to get the most out of it."

Lloyd stole a quick glance at him to see if he were in earnest. The
light tone seemed almost mocking, but the half-closed eyes gazing out
across the lawn were serious enough, and she studied her reply a moment,
feeling that maybe her opportunity had come at last.

"I think," she began timidly, "that the man who gets the most out of
life is the one who makes most of himself--who starts out as they did in
the old days to win his spurs and his accolade. Maybe you know the story
of Edryn, the one that gave Warwick Hall its motto."

He nodded, with that slightly amused smile which always disconcerted
her. "Yes, I know. That's Gay's pet war-cry--'Keep tryst.' But go on,
I'd like to hear your version of it."

In the face of such an invitation she found it very hard to proceed, but
after a moment's hesitation she said almost defiantly:

"Oh, I know you'll considah it a bit of school-girl sentiment to look at
life in such a figurative way, but I think it's beautiful:

"'_To duty and to sorrow_,'" she quoted softly, "'_to disappointment and
defeat thou mayst be called. No matter what the tryst there is but one
reply if thou wouldst win thy knighthood!_'"

"But suppose one never hears any call," he asked teasingly. "Never feels
the spirit move him to make any particular exertion."

"Then it's yoah own fault!" cried Lloyd. "It's just as it says in the
legend. '_Only those will hear who wake at dawn to listen in high
places, and only those will heed who keep the compass needle of their
soul true to the North star of a great ambition!_'"

"Pretty strenuous work, isn't that, for an August day?" he answered.
"And that's all very well for poets and priests and young idealists to
dream of, but when all's said and done, what's the good? What's the
use?"

Clasping his hands behind his head he leaned back in his chair and began
reciting in a dreamy way, as if he were chanting the rhythmical lines, a
poem called "Drifting." It was like an incantation, and Lloyd sat
listening as if he were weaving some spell around her:

          "'My soul to-day
           Is far away
    Sailing the Vesuvian Bay.
           My winged boat,
           A bird afloat,
    Swims round the purple peaks remote.

       *       *       *       *       *

          "'I heed not if
           My rippling skiff
    Float swift or slow from cliff to cliff;
           With dreamful eyes
           My spirit lies,
    Under the walls of Paradise.'"

As he went musically on, verse after verse, Lloyd sat listening, wholly
under the spell of his voice, yet with a baffled impotent sense of being
carried along by a current in exactly the opposite direction from the
one in which she had started to go.

          "'No more, no more
           The worldly shore
    Upbraids me with its wild uproar--'"

It was a Lotus land of irresponsibility and ease and personal
gratification that he was revealing to her as his ideal of life. He
hadn't openly made fun of her enthusiasm and zeal, but he had chilled
her ardour and silenced her, and left her with the feeling that her
knights with their struggles after accolades and ambitions and all those
things were silly folk who made much ado about nothing. It made her
cross.

In the silence that followed there was a shriek from Wardo, somewhere
back near the servants' quarters, and then such a lusty crying that
Lloyd sprang up frightened, and ran to the rescue. She was
conscience-smitten for having left him so long to the care of Enoch,
Cindy's little grandson, whom she had bribed to amuse him for an hour.
It was only because his constant presence and interruptions seemed to
bore Leland that she had done it. Wardo did make tyrannical demands on
her attention, she had to admit, dearly as she loved the child. But when
she found him crying from a bee-sting, and his poor little lip swollen
out of all resemblance to a Cupid's bow she felt a twinge of resentment
towards Leland. If she hadn't sent Wardo away from her, she thought
reproachfully, he wouldn't have been stung, and she wouldn't have sent
him if Leland had acted nicer about having him around. He had actually
muttered in Mom Beck's hearing that it was "a beastly bore always having
that kid poking in."

She had resented it at the time Mom Beck repeated it, but excused it on
the ground that he was not used to children, and that Wardo's persistent
questions and demands did tax one's patience dreadfully sometimes. But
now as he clung to her, sobbing and screaming, she thought
reproachfully, "He might at least have come around to find out what was
the mattah, when he knows how devoted I am to the poah little thing,
even if he didn't take any interest in him himself. I'll keep Wardo with
me all the time aftah this, even if it does bo'ah him."

Leading him back to the porch she took him in her lap and quieted him
with the promise of a wonderful box of paints which he should have next
day, with which to colour all the pretty pictures in all the magazines.
And she quite ignored Leland for awhile to punish him, not knowing that
he understood her pique and was amused at it, and that he was enjoying
the picture she made rocking back and forth in the low chair, with
Wardo's golden curls pressed against her shoulder, and the dimpled arms
clinging around her neck.

Next day she forgot the paints until it was too late for her to get
them, and Betty who was going over to The Beeches and past the store,
offered to take Wardo and let him have the pleasure of buying them
himself. After they had gone she went down to the porch to wait for
Leland. It was almost lesson time. Yesterday's feeling of resentment had
entirely passed, and she looked down the avenue expectantly from her
seat behind the vines. Any moment he might turn in at the gate. The
thought gave her a pleasant thrill of anticipation. As the moments
slipped by she opened her book and began repeating the verses marked for
her to memorize.

Presently she looked up to see a small coloured boy wandering up the
avenue as if he had no particular destination in view and no great
desire to arrive anywhere. She supposed he was the bearer of a message
to the cook, but instead of going around the house he came towards her
with a note in his hand. It was from Leland she saw at the first glance,
and written in Spanish at the second.

She could read enough of it to understand that he was not coming that
morning, but for the rest of it she had to turn to her lexicon for help
in translating. After some time and with much difficulty she managed to
make out the reason. He had gone to Louisville for the day quite
unexpectedly with his brother--a matter of business. He was sorry not to
be able to keep his engagement with her. Only dire necessity kept him
away, and he would be with her in the evening. Until then adieu. She had
to turn to her lexicon again for that next word, and having found it
wondered how he had dared to put it in--that caressing little name, that
word of endearment which he would not have presumed to use in English.
It made the colour flame up in her face.

But he was not coming. She let the note fall to her lap with an
exclamation of disappointment. Then wide eyed and surprised she sat up
straight, suddenly aware how deep that disappointment was; suddenly
realizing what she had never known till this moment, how large a place
Leland Harcourt had grown to hold in her thoughts. Everywhere she turned
she could see his face with that quick flashing smile she loved to bring
to it. She could see that impetuous toss of the head, the eager gesture
of his long slender hand, the easy grace of his manner that gave him
his distinguished, patrician air.

"Why, I'm like Hildegarde!" she whispered wonderingly. "'His eyes are so
blue they fill all my dreams!' Only Mistah Harcourt's are dark."

Now if Lloyd had never heard the story of the Three Weavers, never been
a member of the Order of Hildegarde, never made the promise to her
father about the silver yard-stick, her reverie in the hammock that
morning might have led to a very different result. But because she had
promised, and because she must keep tryst no matter how hard it was to
do, she faced the matter squarely.

"He wouldn't have put that word in the note if he wasn't beginning to
care for me," she admitted, "and it wouldn't make me have that queah
little sawt of half-way glad feeling if I wasn't beginning to care for
him."

The hammock swung faster. She was thinking of a day on the seashore
years before, when she had been playing out on the rocks. And while she
built her little castles the tide came creeping in, creeping so quietly
that she did not know it was there until all the sand between her and
safety was covered and a fisherman had to wade in and carry her out.
Although she did not put the comparison into words, that was what she
felt was happening now, and much as she liked him and loved to be with
him and missed him when he did not come, she felt that his influence
over her was creeping up like a tide that would surely drown her ability
to keep her promise to her father.

"He _does_ influence me," she admitted to herself. "I might as well be
honest about it. Sometimes he can almost make me believe that black is
white. How do I know but what I might grow to be like poah mistaken
Hertha? He was only a page, but she called him prince in her thought
until she really believed him one."

Then as yesterday's conversation came back to her she sprang from the
hammock saying to herself, "And he isn't even a knight, or he wouldn't
have made fun of my poah little attempt to make him listen to the King's
call. I'll not think about him a minute longah. It would only be
squandahing the golden thread that Clotho left me."

Running up the stairs she got her hat and started to follow Betty. But
all the way up and all the way down and all the way that she went
towards The Beeches that little word at the end of the letter--that
sweet caressing bird-note of a name, sang itself over and over to her.
He had called her that, and to-night he was coming.

She did not go all the way to The Beeches, for she met Betty on the way
back, Wardo proudly bearing his box of paints, and Betty re-reading a
letter which she had found in the office. It was from Madam Chartley.
There was a vacancy in Warwick Hall itself and she was to fill it; was
to be her beloved Miss Chilton's assistant in the English classes. Her
happiness was as great over this news as her disappointment had been
over the return of her manuscript. As Madam Chartley wanted her at the
school by the first of September there were only two weeks in which to
make her preparations to leave.

Although Lloyd had heard the matter discussed she never fully believed
that Betty was going away from Locust until she had the letter in her
own hands and read Madam Chartley's expression of pleasure at the
prospect of having Betty with her permanently. It swept away all thought
of her own affairs, for Betty had grown as dear to her as a sister in
the years they had been together. She followed her mournfully into the
white and gold room, offering to help her with her preparations, and
pouring out her regret and her disapproval of Betty's plans. It wasn't
necessary at all she insisted for Betty to leave them, and Locust
wouldn't be the same place with her gone.

Wardo required less attention than usual that afternoon, for charmed
with his new paints, he sat at a low table in Betty's room while the
girls sewed and talked, and coloured the pictures in every magazine he
could lay his hands on. It was sunset when Lloyd noticed how long he had
been bending over the table, and persuaded him to lay aside his brush
till next day.

"Look at the pretty red sunset," she urged, trying to interest him in
something else. "It's as red as a cherry."

He looked at it solemnly, considering her comparison. "No, it's wed as
the blood of a thousand dwagons," he answered.

Lloyd looked at him in astonishment. "What do you know about dragons,
child?"

"Betty telled me, when I painted one wif my paints, here in this book."
He began turning the leaves of one of the magazines. "Dwagons is the
stwongest fings there is," he added with a knowing wag of his head,
feeling that she needed enlightenment. "But my fahvah could fight
one--He's so stwong. My fahvah could fight anyfing."

"Always the same old story," said Lloyd in a low tone to Betty. "Isn't
it dreadful? Always harping on the perfection of his hero. Seems to me
it would have been bettah if she had not tried to keep the truth from
him. The disillusionment is going to be feahful some of these days. It
will shake his belief in everything."

As she rocked back and forth with his warm little body nestled against
her, she thought how differently Ida would have chosen could she have
known that this precious little soul was to be given into her keeping.
If somebody had only gone to her with old Hildgardmar's
warning--"Remember that in the right weaving of this web depends not
only thy own happiness but the happiness of _all those who come after
thee,_" it might have made a world of difference. But nobody had opened
her eyes to the enormity of the responsibility she was assuming, and
now, maybe despite all her careful training and frantic efforts to make
her little son what she would have him be, she might not be able to turn
his life out of the channel of his inherited tastes and appetites.

It must be _awful_ she thought, hugging him closer, to love a child with
the passionate devotion that Ida loved this one, and have it grow up
into a worthless vagabond like Ned Bannan. Then a stray wonder crossed
her mind if Leland Harcourt's mother would have been disappointed in him
if she could have lived to see him wasting his splendid talents and
opportunities; just drifting along in an aimless, thistledown sort of
existence when he might be such a power for good if he would only exert
himself.

"He doesn't measuah up to the third notch at all," she admitted with a
feeling of regret.

Just then there was a long distance call for her at the telephone, and
hastily putting Wardo down she went to answer it.

"It's from Mistah Harcourt," she called carelessly, in answer to her
mother's inquiry from the next room. "He was coming ovah to-night but
something detained him in Louisville, and he called me up to tell me not
to expect him."

She hoped that she had kept the flutter out of her voice that the sound
of his voice brought into her pulses. For at the close of this
commonplace message was the request that she make no engagement with any
one else for the next night. He had something to tell her, and
then--there was that same word with which he had closed his note--that
soft musical name, seeming twice as personal and significant because of
the tone in which he said it. She felt that he must be conscious of the
quick blush it brought to her face as she hastily hung up the receiver.

That night for the first time that summer Lloyd was alone with her
father and mother. Betty had Madam Chartley's letter to answer, and the
old Colonel had gone out to dinner. The three sat on the broad
white-pillared porch in the moonlight, Lloyd on the step at her father's
feet, her arm on his knee. Ever since the telephone message her thoughts
had been in a tumult. It was useless for her to pretend that she didn't
know why Leland wanted to see her alone, and what it was he was coming
to tell her. She was glad and sorry and half frightened and altogether
confused. "He isn't the prince at all," she kept saying to herself as if
it were a charm that would help her ward off his approach and keep her
true to her Hildegarde promise.

And yet--his wooing was the kind one reads of in books. She would be
sorry to have _that_ come to an end. It was so delightful to have some
one write poems to her and sing songs in such a way that every tone and
glance dedicated them to her alone. If one could only go on that way
through all the summers, being adored in that fashion, knowing she was
crowned queen in somebody's heart, how delightful it would be. But she
didn't want things to come to a crisis when she would have to make grave
decisions and solemn promises. She didn't want to go one step farther
than this borderland of romance where they lingered now. What she wanted
was just to go on building her little castles as she had done that day
on the sea-shore, and yet be assured that the tide wouldn't come
creeping up any farther. It was just far enough now to be interesting.
She wished they would begin to talk about things like that, but she
shrank from bringing up such a subject herself. After awhile she
broached one almost akin.

"Mothah," she asked, breaking a long comfortable silence that had fallen
on them, "do you think that Lucy is happy?"

"No, not entirely--that is just at present," Mrs. Sherman answered
slowly, as if considering. "She's hardly adjusted herself yet to the new
order of things, but she will in time because she's such a yielding
little soul, and is really devoted to her husband. For instance, when he
insisted she gave up her church to please him and joined his. It meant a
great struggle and a sacrifice on her part, and he is not at all devout,
doesn't attend services more than twice a year; so it couldn't have
made such a vital difference to him where she went. Then at home her
father always placed a certain amount in the bank every month to his
wife's credit, so there never was any unpleasantness about money
matters. While Jameson is very wealthy and lavishes luxuries and
beautiful clothes on her, he reserves the pleasure of buying and
spending entirely to himself. Treats her like a child in their financial
arrangements, and doles out little allowances as if she couldn't be
trusted to spend it intelligently. She's so sensitive that she'd rather
go without than ask him for a cent, and it often puts her in an
embarrassing position to be without."

"In other words," put in Papa Jack, "he's thoroughly inconsiderate and
selfish, although I imagine he'd be mightily amazed if any one applied
that term to him since he is so lavish in giving things in his own way."

"Yes, he is," was the answer. "I've noticed it in a dozen little ways.
It's always _his_ wishes and _his_ tastes that have to be consulted,
never Lucy's. Yet aside from that trait he is a thoroughly fine man, and
because she respects him and looks up to him and is such a sweet
yielding little creature, he'll come in time to be the centre of her
universe, and she'll revolve around him like a loyal little planet. But
a girl of a different temperament wouldn't. If she were impetuous and
highstrung like you for instance," she added with a smile at Lloyd, "she
would see the injustice of it and resent it so bitterly that there would
be continual friction and jar. With your temperament you couldn't live
peaceably with anybody like that."

"I know I couldn't," admitted Lloyd frankly, "especially if he showed
any jealousy. Mistah Jameson is jealous of every friend Lucy evah had at
the Post. He doesn't like it a bit when she refers to the good times she
used to have with the boys there, even when they were just ordinary
friends. Half a dozen times I've seen the tears come to her eyes at some
inconsiderate thing he'd say, and I'd think if I were Lucy I couldn't
sit there and take it like a martyr. I'd have to jump up and shake him
till his teeth rattled."

"What a cat and dog time you would have," laughed Mrs. Sherman. "Worse
than little Mary Ware's nightmare that she had after Eugenia's wedding."

"By the way," exclaimed Mr. Sherman, slapping his pockets to find a
letter he had placed in one of them, "I knew there was something I
intended to tell you. Jack Ware is on his way here now."

Then in answer to the surprise and the questions that greeted his
announcement he explained, "I suggested making him assistant manager of
the mines and the Company wants to have a look at him, and put him
through a sort of examination. He's so young they rather doubt my
judgment in the matter. But they'll find out when they see him. We
telegraphed him to come, and he left Arizona several days ago. He'll be
here only a day and night probably."

Lloyd left her seat on the step and took a chair beside her father,
sitting straight and alert in her interest. It was hard to realize that
Jack Ware was grown. He was only fourteen when she had known him on the
desert. "Oh, will you evah forget," she laughed, "the way he looked when
we surprised him at the washtub, all tied up in an apron, helping Joyce
with the family washing?"

"His readiness to pitch in to whatever is to be done is his chief
characteristic," was the answer. "That is what makes him so valuable at
the mines. Patient and reliable and strong, he is one of the finest
young fellows of my acquaintance. He'll be one of the big men of the
West some day, for young as he is, he is into everything that makes for
the welfare and development of the territory he lives in."

All the rest of the evening was spent in recalling that visit to Ware's
Wigwam, and when Lloyd went up to bed, although Leland Harcourt's name
had not been mentioned, she felt that her doubts and unspoken questions
about him had been answered. She must not listen any more to that little
name, that caressing little name that left such a thrill in its wake.

"Wise old Hildgardmar," said Mrs. Sherman in a playful tone after Lloyd
had left them. "I don't suppose when you sent for Jack that it entered
your head you were giving her the very safeguard of contrast that I
hoped she might have, but you will be doing it all the same."

"No, I didn't," he confessed, "but I think you are magnifying the
interest she has in Harcourt. She never mentioned his name all evening."

"But she talked all around him," answered Mrs. Sherman, "and I think she
came to the conclusion before she went up-stairs that he does not
measure up to your standards, and is almost sure that he does not even
meet hers."




CHAPTER XI

THE END OF SEVERAL THINGS


THE old Colonel was in the library, telling for the hundredth time to
the small listener on his knee the story of the battle that had taken
his right arm. For since Wardo had found that his father's father was in
the same wild charge against the Yankees, and had fought like a tiger
till a wound in the head and another in the knee sent him to the rear on
a stretcher, he could not hear the story often enough. And that led to
other tales of things that had happened when the two soldier-friends
were schoolboys. It puzzled Wardo to find any resemblance between the
mischievous boy whom the Colonel referred to as Cy Bannon, and the
dignified judge whose picture hung on the wall of the Colonel's den.

"Oh, his name was Cyrus Edward then, just as yours is now," explained
the Colonel when he finally understood the difficulty. "But it was too
long a name for such a grasshopper of a lad. He'd have been out of
sight before you could say it all. So they cut it down to Cy, just as
yours is cut to Wardo."

"Will I be Judge Cywus Edwa'd Bannon then when I'm gwoed up?" asked
Wardo.

The seriousness of the big innocent eyes fixed on him made the Colonel
move uneasily. "Heaven knows," he muttered. "_I_ don't. But it's to be
hoped you'll take after him instead of the one next in line of
succession."

The question made such a profound impression on him he could not shake
it off, and acting on the impulse of the moment he decided to take it to
the Judge himself for an answer. He would show him the winsome little
lad who bore his name. He would demand of him what right he had to
withhold from him the protection and shelter that was his heritage. The
child's father had been cast off in proud scorn for his profligate ways.
Secretly the Colonel had always thought that his old friend had shirked
responsibility, and that the open repudiation of him by his family had
given Ned his final downward shove.

It made no difference to the Colonel that Ned's name was a forbidden one
in the household. _He'd_ tell Cy Bannon a few things. Then his face
softened and he smiled a trifle foolishly, muttering something about its
being a case of the pot calling the kettle black. The Judge might come
back at him with the argument that he had been just as harsh with his
own child for far less cause; but that would only give him a chance to
urge a reconciliation on the ground that _he_ had surrendered
gracefully, and had been glad of it ever since. Cy would be a mighty
queer sort of man, he concluded, if he could hold out against such a
little grandson as Wardo. He was a child to walk into anybody's
affections.

Lloyd had left the pair so deeply absorbed in war-stories, that she was
surprised on her return to the library a little later, to find no trace
of either of them. They'd gone for a trolley ride Walker told her, and
expected to be gone most of the morning. So relieved of her
responsibility Lloyd made a longer visit in Rollington than usual. The
crisis had been passed some time now, and Ida was so much better she was
beginning to talk about Wardo's return. She would be able to sit up in a
few days. As Lloyd entertained her with accounts of Wardo's sayings and
doings she realized more and more what a large place he had come to fill
in the household, and how sorely they would all miss him when they had
to give him up. Ida's future looked so hopeless. It would be a long time
before she would be strong enough to begin sewing again. She talked
wearily of the burden she must assume as soon as possible, and Lloyd
came away weighed down with a sense of the injustice and wrong in the
world and her helplessness to right it.

It was nearly noon when she reached the house. Wardo, who had just come
in with her grandfather, rushed down the steps to meet her, his sailor
hat on the back of his head, and his arms outstretched to give her glad
welcome. He clasped her around the knees, and put up his face to be
kissed. His morning's adventures made him feel that he had been away an
age. Then his voice trembling with the importance of his news, he
announced the three things of his visit which had made the most
impression on him.

"I saw the place on my gwan'fahvah's head where the Yankee bullet hit
him, wite over his eye! An' the Colonel he shaked his stick at my
gwan'fahvah, and got wed in the face when he talked." Then digging down
into the mite of a pocket that graced his blouse, he triumphantly
brought out the third item, a silver dollar that Judge Bannon had given
him.

By this time the Colonel had come out, and in answer to Lloyd's excited
questions confessed the truth of Wardo's tale. He _had_ shaken his stick
at the Judge. They had had a stormy interview and he lost his temper. He
was sorry at first that he had taken Wardo, the child was so frightened,
but it proved a good move, for his appealing little face pleaded his
cause better than anything else could have done, and in the end the
Judge was completely won over by his handsome little namesake.

"_And_," concluded the Colonel triumphantly, "he's promised to take Ned
back and give him one more chance. He'll keep the lad and his mother in
any event, and he's to send for them just as soon as she's able to be
moved."

"Oh, you blessed old peace-makah!" cried Lloyd running up the steps to
throw her arms around his neck and give him as rapturous a hug as Wardo
had given her. "You're a perfect darling, and you've made me so happy I
don't know what to do or say. I believe I'm as happy as Ida will be when
she heahs it, and I'm going ovah there the minute I've had lunch, to
tell her. You're a public benefactah and everything else in the
dictionary that's extra nice and fine."

It was joy to the Colonel to have his praises sung like that, and he
went around the rest of the week with a self-satisfied virtuous feeling
that kept him beaming benignly on everything and everybody. In such an
angelic humour was he, that Walker confided to Mom Beck that he was
"right sma'ht worried 'bout ole Marse."

It was a day of surprises for the whole family. On Lloyd's return from
her second visit to Rollington, about the middle of the afternoon, she
saw Jack Ware on the rear platform of the trolley-car, which passed the
carriage when she was nearly home. He had arrived two days sooner than
any one expected he could. Taller, broader and browner by far than the
slim lad who waved her farewell from the Wigwam, he was unmistakably the
same Jack, and she would have recognized him anywhere.

The second glance showed her father standing just behind him. They both
leaned out and waved their hats as they passed the carriage. A moment
later they were stepping off the car opposite the entrance gate, and
waiting for her to come up.

"Anothah knight comes riding," she thought with a smile, wondering what
put the whimsical notion in her head, for she did not count Jack in
that class. He was simply her good comrade of the plains, nothing
picturesque about _him_.

"I don't suppose there could be about the modern knight," she thought,
amused that such fancies should come to her. "His only thought is to
'get there.' When young Lochinvar comes out of the West now, his 'steed
_is_ the best' from that standpoint, but you can't make the pictuahs and
poems out of trolley-cars that you can out of hawses in those old-time
fancy trappings."

Stepping out of the carriage, she sent it on ahead and turned to Jack
with such a cordial welcome that he reddened with pleasure under the
brown of his sunburned cheeks.

"This is my 'Promised Land' as well as Mary's," he said as they walked
slowly towards the house, and he paused to look up at the grand old
trees arching over them. "You've no idea how I've looked forward to
seeing all this. Mother always pictured it as a sort of Beulah land.
Then Joyce took up the same tune, and lastly Mary. She's the most
enthusiastic of all, and sat up till midnight the day she found I was
coming, to make a list of all the things she said I mustn't fail to see
or ask about."

Taking a memorandum book from his pocket he opened it and held it out
for Lloyd and her father to see. There were three pages whereon Mary had
set down instructions for him to follow. Lloyd laughed as she glanced at
the head-line.

      THINGS TO DO WITHOUT FAIL

      1 Make Mr. Rob Moore's acquaintance, and see Oaklea.

      2 See The Beeches and all Mrs. Walton's curios,
      especially the bells of Luzon and mother-of-pearl
      fire-screen.

      3 See if Elise Walton is as pretty as she used to be,
      and notice how she does her hair now.

      4 Ask Lloyd to play on the harp and sing the Dove
      Song, when the candles are lighted in the
      drawing-room.

The list was such a long one that Lloyd did not read farther, but
glanced at the page headed--

      THINGS NOT SO IMPORTANT, BUT I'D LIKE TO KNOW

      1 Ask about Girlie Dinsmore if you have a chance. Is
      she as much of a baby as ever?

      2 What has become of that horrid Bernice Howe?

      3 Does Betty still correspond with the "Pilgrim
      Father?"

      4 Look in the book-case on the north side of the
      library, and copy the name of that book on Spiders.

      5 Find out all you can about the man Allison is going
      to marry.

There were a dozen similar items.

"Isn't that characteristic of Mary?" exclaimed Lloyd. "She's such a deah
little bunch of curiosity. Maybe I oughtn't to call it that. A live,
intense interest in everything and everybody would be moah like it. But
only twenty-foah hours to do it all in! How can we manage it?"

"Not even that," answered Mr. Sherman, "for part of it must be spent
with the stock-holders."

"And you couldn't stay longah?" began Lloyd.

"No, I'm due back at the mines very shortly, and I want to make a flying
visit to Joyce in New York before I return, and stop over at Annapolis
for a glimpse of Holland. You know I've never been East before, and I
want to make the most of it."

"Well," said Lloyd, planning rapidly as they walked on. "We'll crowd
just as much as possible into this one evening. There'll be time for a
drive befoah dinnah, that will give you a bird's-eye view of the Valley,
and a short call at Oaklea and The Beeches. We can ansah Mary's
questions as we drive along. Befoah we start I'll telephone in to town
and ask Rob to come ovah and take dinnah with you to-night, and we'll
ask the Waltons to come ovah--"

She would have paused just there even if they had not reached the house
and her sentence been interrupted by Jack's introduction to her mother
and Betty, for as she mentioned telephoning it flashed across her what
Leland had telephoned her, not to make any engagement for that evening,
that he wanted to see her alone.

"But suahly," she thought, "he'll undahstand that that is impossible
undah the circumstances--the only night Jack will be heah."

The next few hours flew by as if winged. They caught Lloyd up out of the
dream-world in which she had been living and thoroughly wakened her. It
was such a busy, breezy world from Jack's outlook, so much to do and see
and conquer. As she listened to his description of the little mining
camp that had grown into a town in the short time he had been there, and
then to the enthusiastic plans he unfolded to her father of what the
mine owners might do to develop and civilize it, she found herself
regarding this young Aladdin of the West with growing consideration.

He and Rob found mutual interests from the moment of meeting. She noted
with surprise how oddly alike they were in their views. She hadn't known
before that Rob was interested in so many things that she knew nothing
about, political situations and Juvenile Court reforms, and trusts and
unions and all those things. But then she had scarcely seen him since he
had taken a man's place in the world. Good old Rob! She was proud of the
way he was discussing these things with Jack and her father and the
Colonel. There was a note of authority in what he said that the older
men respected. But it did seem so funny for him to be talking of
anything weightier than tennis and skating and his Latin exams, or
college scrapes. He talked almost as well as Leland Harcourt she
admitted.

After dinner Jack took out his memorandum and crossed off all the items
that had been attended to. While they were laughing over Mary's
questions and dictating answers for him to write lest he forget them,
the Waltons arrived with Gay, who had been spending the day with them.
A little later Alex Shelby followed. He was on Mary's list, and had a
number of messages to send to the little girl who had amused him so
greatly at Eugenia's wedding with her quaint speeches and unexpected
questions.

From the sound of voices and the number of people in the drawing-room,
one might have imagined that a reception was in full swing when Leland
Harcourt came up on the porch. Lloyd, recognizing his step, hurried out
to meet him and explain why she had been unable to grant his request.
She ushered him into the drawing-room to meet their guest, anxious that
they should be favourably impressed with each other. One could always
count on Leland for doing the graceful thing socially she thought
complacently, but this one time he failed her.

He had been at the house so constantly all summer that she did not think
it necessary to make any special effort for his entertainment now, other
than to draw him into the conversation with Jack and Rob. They were the
comparative strangers and she was giving them the most of her attention.
Rob had been at the house only twice that summer. He was as interested
as she in hearing about Joyce and Mary, so when she found that Leland
did not seem to care to talk, she went back to their former
conversation, recalling the duck hunt, the picnic at Hole-in-the-rock,
and their dinner at "Coffe Al's" with Phil Tremont.

Everybody else was talking. Everybody else seemed in good spirits but
Leland Harcourt. Lloyd could almost feel his silence it became so
marked.

"He's sulky," she thought. "It's just his horrid jealousy cropping out
like his brothah Jameson's. He doesn't want me to be nice to my oldest
and deahest friends. I wish he wouldn't act that way."

Then she sang, since it was next in order on Mary's memorandum, and
while she sang, although she did not once look at him directly, she was
uncomfortably conscious that his eyes were fixed on her with the
determined gaze which they always wore when he had some resolve which he
intended to carry out at all hazards.

As she turned from the harp he was the first to rise and place a chair
for her. Bending over her he said, under cover of the applause, "I'll
not be put off any longer. You must let me see you a few minutes just as
soon as I can make an opportunity for you to slip out of the room."

Low as his voice was, Rob, who was sitting just behind him, heard what
he said, and then something else that he added in Spanish. Just a word,
but it seemed to carry some potent appeal, for with a slight flush she
rose. Leland made the opportunity he wished, by saying to Jack that one
of the pleasures not to be missed was hearing Gay play the violin. Of
course Jack immediately asked for the nocturne which he suggested, and
Gay, always obliging, at once complied.

Under cover of the music Leland stepped into the hall, holding the
portière aside with a bow for Lloyd to pass through. Rob's glance
followed them across the hall, across the moonlighted porch to the
avenue, where the locust shadows fell dense and black. Then he turned
his attention resolutely to the music, listening as if in rapt
enjoyment, but in reality never hearing a note.

The nocturne came to an end, and there was an encore and still another
before Lloyd came back into the room. She was alone, and Rob, in one
quick glance, saw that all the bright colour had left her face. She was
gripping her little lace fan nervously, and her hazel eyes had deepened
almost to black as they always did under the strain of unusual
excitement or emotion. He was sure that she was very near tears, and
with his usual impulse to shield her from all that was unpleasant, he
moved his chair so that no one else saw her agitation and began talking
volubly about the first thing he could think of. It happened to be Mary
Ware's method of getting rid of an unwelcome guest by playing Fox and
Stork, and as she listened to the lengthy story he purposely made of it,
she had time to regain her composure before any one else came up.

Afterwards he heard her explaining to Mrs. Walton, "Mistah Harcourt had
to leave early, and didn't want to break up the pah'ty by coming in to
say good night."

When Rob heard next day that Leland was leaving the Valley at once for a
trip to South America, he thought he understood the cause of Lloyd's
agitation. It distressed her to have him go so far away. He had been
positive for some time that there was some understanding between them.
Now this confirmed his suspicions.

Lloyd was grieved over the parting, but not to the extent Rob imagined.
Many a night after, she sat curled up on the window-seat in her room,
looking down through the trees to the place where she had stood with
Leland the night she bade him good-bye. She had not dreamed of such a
stormy interview as that, she had not imagined any wooing could be so
impassioned, reaching to such heights and depths. He hadn't paid the
slightest attention when she tried to stop him, but had asserted
triumphantly that he always got what he started out to win, and that
this was a matter of life and death, and he'd win her love or die in the
attempt. Sometimes, in thinking it over, she was afraid he would make
his threats true, and then sometimes she thought with a quick indrawn
breath, remembering how his wild protestations had thrilled her, that it
would have been sweet to listen if she could only have been sure that it
was right. He vowed he would come back when he could prove to her that
he had won the accolade which she seemed to think was so essential, but
she did not look for him. In her heart she said that the one real
romance of her life was at an end.

Everything seemed to come to an end just then. Jack left the next
morning, and before the close of the week Wardo was taken away. Ida was
able to be moved to the old Bannon homestead near Anchorage. Although it
was the one great thing Lloyd had wished for, she missed her little
charge at every turn, and the days stretched out ahead of her long and
empty.

The first of September Betty went away with Elise Walton under her wing,
happy in the fact that she was to enter Freshman at Warwick Hall, where
the older girls had had such glorious times. The next day the Harcourts
closed the Cabin and went back to San Antonio. Gay spent her last night
in the Valley at The Locusts, and there were more bed-time confidences
before they fell asleep, long after midnight.

"Seems as if the end of the summah brings the end of everything," sighed
Lloyd regretfully.

"It's more like the beginning of everything for you," contradicted Gay.
"You'll be beginning your shopping soon, and your trips to the tailor
and the dressmaker and the milliner, and you know you'll enjoy getting
all the lovely clothes you're to have as a débutante. It'll be as much
fun as planning a trousseau. Then there'll be your début party in your
Aunt Jane's lovely big town house, and all the rest that's to follow.
It'll be just _grand_! A regular procession of social successes and
triumphs.

"And as for Leland," she continued, mentioning him for the first time
since his departure. "You needn't worry about _that_. Of course we knew
what had happened just as soon as he bounced in looking like a
thunder-cloud, and announced his intention of leaving next morning.
We'd seen it coming on all summer. Jameson is tickled to death over it,
for this trip to South America is one he has been wanting him to take
for a long time. They have some property there that needs looking after,
and he thinks now that his ambition is roused he'll take some interest
in things."

"But no mattah what he does," said Lloyd firmly, "I'll nevah change my
mind. I don't want to get married, Gay," she added almost tearfully. "I
read a story the othah day, the diary of a young girl that made me think
of myself. She said, 'I don't want to be married. Just to be loved and
adored and written to and crowned Queen of Somebody's heart.' Of co'se
any girl wants _that_."

"That's just the way I feel," confided Gay after a moment's pause. Then,
"You've been so busy this summer with your own affairs I don't suppose
you've noticed what's been going on around you; but I'm afraid I've got
myself into a pickle. You see I've already invited Kitty down to San
Antonio to spend Lent with me, and I've written to Frank Percival about
her, and told her about him and got them interested in each other. You
know ever since I've been so intimate with Kitty I've wanted her to
marry Frank, so that she'd always live near me. And now--now I'm not so
sure that I'm going to live there myself."

"You dreadful little match-makah," laughed Lloyd, so amused by Gay's
confession that she never thought to inquire what had caused her change
of mind about her own residence. "You oughtn't to meddle in such things.
Just look what a pickle you got _me_ into. If you hadn't made me promise
what you did about being nice to Mistah Harcourt, and told him the
things you did about me, we'd nevah have had the scene we did, and would
have been good friends always. But look what you've done. Sent him on a
hopeless chase aftah a shadow, for he says he'll nevah change his mind,
and I _know_ I won't change mine."

Gay giggled. "When an irresistible force meets an immovable body, what
_does_ happen? I've always wondered."

"Just what will happen when Mistah Harcourt comes back," was Lloyd's
dignified answer. "_I'll_ not be moved."

"And he's not to be resisted," said Gay. "So there we go in the same old
circle. But I'm glad for some reasons that you're so determined, for if
I _should_ make up my mind to live in the Valley then I'd be glad you
were here instead of in San Antonio."

"Oh, are you all going to buy the Cabin?" exclaimed Lloyd, sitting up in
bed in her eagerness. "How lovely."

"No, 'we all' are not," confessed Gay. "I _knew_ you didn't have any
idea of what was going on this summer. But--well, you know who my first
'Knight of the Looking-glass' was. He says the Scripture says that 'the
first shall be last,' and he insists he is _both_. He wants to buy the
Cabin some day, so that my little mirror can hang there always, up among
the roses where he first saw me. It _would_ be sweet and romantic,
wouldn't it? But it doesn't seem exactly fair to Kitty to get her tied
up down there and then skip out and leave her."

"Kitty isn't tied up yet, by a long shot," laughed Lloyd, who found it
hard to take Gay's shy confession seriously. "But I can't get used to
this lightning change in you. You were so suah you'd not have any Darby
and Joan emotions in yours while 'Life is May.' You've talked all summah
against early marriages."

"I'm not an 'immovable body' like you. And I would be a little nearer
gray hairs if we waited for two years as we'd certainly have to do, but
even if we didn't wait it wouldn't be the same as it is with Lucy and
Jameson, and some other young married people I know. Alex is so
_different_. Well, he is," she insisted indignantly. "What are you
laughing at? You know he's different."

"Yes, I do know it," answered Lloyd, instantly sobered by her
realization of the fact that Gay was no longer joking, but was laying
bare her heart's dearest secret. "He's a deah, good fellow, and he'll be
just as loving and true and sweet to you always as the old Doctah is to
Aunt Alicia. Nobody could want moah than that I'm suah. So heah's my
blessing and the hope that you'll live to keep yoah Golden Wedding as
happily as they are going to do." She leaned over and kissed her
tenderly.

They talked so late that night that Gay almost missed her train next
morning, but as she scrambled breathlessly on to the rear platform she
called back happily, "What's the odds, even if it did make me late? It
was such a nice wind-up to such a glorious summer."




CHAPTER XII

SIX MONTHS LATER


IT was a cold snowy afternoon, late in January. Rob Moore, looking at
his watch as he hurried along the street, found that he was ten minutes
ahead of the time at which the next car was due to start to the Valley.
Rather than wait on the windy corner or take refuge in the already
crowded drug-store, he walked on down to the car-shed. He rarely left
town this early. As he sprang up the steps and took his seat in the
waiting car, he saw that it was the one usually filled by the
school-children living in the suburbs. It was already nearly filled now
by half-grown boys and girls, flocking in with their book straps and
lunch-baskets. It made him think of his own High school days. They
laughed and joked and called messages back and forth as freely as if
they were at home. Here and there he recognized the younger sisters and
brothers of some of his old classmates, so like them that it gave him a
curious sense of having stepped backward several years. There was Wat
Sewall wriggling and writhing out of his overcoat with the same
contortions that Fred always went through with. That slap on the back
with its accompanying "Hi, there, old man," was exactly like T. D.
Williams' salutation. He nearly always laid a fellow out flat when he
spoke to him. And the couple on the seat in front of him, exchanging
class pins, was only a repetition of a scene he had witnessed dozens of
times.

With a reminiscent smile he shook out the pages of the evening paper
which he had bought as he came along and glanced at the head-lines. But
before he had time to read further the girl in front of him exclaimed,
"Look, Harry! Here comes Miss Sherman! Isn't she perfectly stunning in
that dark blue broadcloth? I think she's the prettiest débutante of the
season."

"She's a peach," was the enthusiastic answer. "I say, Ethel, she looks
like you."

Rob did not see the girlish blush which rose to Ethel's cheeks, for at
the first exclamation he had lowered his paper to peer quickly through
the window. He had just a glimpse of a slender stylish figure hurrying
into the ticket office.

The girl in front was speaking. "I suppose I've been more interested in
the débutantes this year than any other because Cousin Amy is one of
them. She comes out to Anchorage for a week-end now and then to rest up,
and I keep her talking the whole time about what they do. She says that
Miss Sherman is the most popular of them all, with the girls as well as
the men. She's had so many beautiful entertainments given in her honour,
and she's been asked to help receive or pour tea or do something or
other at every single function that's been given in Louisville this
winter. I think it's perfectly grand to be out in society when you can
be as great a success as that. They say that the American Beauties sent
to her in just one day sometimes would fill a florist's shop window.
There's a man from Cincinnati who sends them all the time. He's crazy
about her. I should be too if I were a man. Cousin Amy has a photograph
of her taken in evening dress, and she's simply regal looking. I don't
wonder she makes a sensation wherever she goes."

"Here she comes now," interrupted the boy, turning with a stare of frank
admiration. Rob turned too, as Lloyd came down the aisle, glancing from
one side to another for an empty seat. Her face was glowing from her
walk in the cold wind, and the little hat of dark blue velvet and her
rich dark furs made her seem fairer than ever by contrast. Hers was a
delicate, patrician style of beauty, and Rob in one critical glance saw
that this winter in society had given the graceful girl the ease and
poise of a charming woman. The little school-girl on the seat in front
had good reason for admiring her so extravagantly. He rose as she came
nearer, and stepped out in the aisle to give her the seat by the window.

"Oh, Rob! This is great!" the little school-girl heard her exclaim
cordially. "I haven't seen you for an age. How does it happen you are
going out on such an early train?"

Much as she was interested in "Harry's" remarks, she wished he would
keep still at least until the car started. She wanted to hear how this
big handsome man answered her adorable Miss Sherman. She would have been
shocked could she have heard his second remark.

"There's a big flake of soot on your nose, Lloyd."

"Thanks," she said, almost looking cross-eyed in her endeavour to locate
it. "There usually is in this dirty town. There! Is it off?" She
scrubbed away with a bit of a handkerchief she took from her muff. "And
I was flattering myself as I came along that I looked especially spick
and span," she sighed. "It's refreshing to have somebody tell you the
truth about yoahself, and you nevah were one to mince mattahs, Bobby."

The old name on the lips of this pretty girl so like the old Lloyd in
some ways, yet so bewilderingly unlike in others, stirred him strangely.

"Better throw off your furs and that heavy jacket in this over-heated
car," was his only answer. "You'll take cold when you get off if you
don't." She thanked him for the suggestion, and, as he hung her wraps
over the back of the seat, settled herself comfortably for the hour's
ride.

"Now tell me all about it," he began as the car started. "All that
you've been doing these last months. Of course I've kept up with you in
the papers. I know that you went here and went there, and that you wore
sky-blue pink folderols at this banquet and velvet satin crêpe de chine
at the Country Club dinner, with feathers and jewels to match, but
that's no more than all the rest of the world knows. I want to be let in
on the ground floor and told about the inner workings of this social
whirl. How have you managed to do it all? To vibrate between town and
country and not peg out. You look as fresh as a daisy; as if the pace
that kills agrees with you."

"I haven't vibrated much," she answered. "I've made Aunt Jane's house my
headquartahs, and you know what a crank she is about hygiene. Every
moment not actually engaged in 'whirling' she had reduced to a system of
simple living. What I have suffered in the way of naps in a darkened
room when I wasn't sleepy, and hot milk when I loathed the idea of
swallowing anything, and gymnastic exercises in the attic when the
weathah was too bad for long walks, would fill a volume."

"Is the game worth the candle?" he asked soberly.

She hesitated. "Well, yes. For a season anyhow. I wouldn't want to keep
up such a round yeah aftah yeah, but I _have_ had a good time, and I
must confess it's awfully nice to be really grown up and have everybody
treat you with the consideration due yoah age."

They were out in the open country now. The car stopped, and as the door
opened to admit a passenger, the shrill voices of some children skating
on an ice pond near the road floated cheerily in. Lloyd looked out the
window with a smile at the gay scene.

"I'd like to be out there with them," she confessed. "Look at that
little girl in the red mittens and Tam O'Shanter. She skates exactly the
way Katie Mallard used to. Oh, deah, didn't we used to have fun with her
down on our ice pond?"

"Do you remember the day Malcolm broke through when he was trying to
cake-walk on the ice?" asked Rob with a reminiscent grin.

"He was laughing about that only last week when he took me to the
Country Club dinnah. I've seen a lot of Malcolm this wintah."

"I thought he was rushing Molly Standforth."

"Well, he is, pah't of the time, but he's rushed me too, as you call it,
just as much."

Rob gave her a keen glance, but she made the announcement in such a calm
way that he said to himself there couldn't be much in it as far as she
was concerned, or she wouldn't have spoken of it in the way she did.

At Anchorage the boy and girl in front left the car, he with such open
solicitude for her comfort as he helped her off that Lloyd's eyes met
Rob's with a twinkle.

"Aftah all, it's good to be young like that," she said. "Don't you
remembah Kitty and Guy Ferris at that age? How we used to tease Kitty
for keeping a dead rose and a valentine and a brass button from his
military coat, tied up with a blue ribbon in a candy box?"

"But we boys had a better time teasing Guy about the lock of Kitty's
hair that he carried around in the back of his watch. His watch got out
of order, and when the jeweller opened it and found all that hair in the
back, he didn't say a word, but with a most disgusted look tossed it
into the wastebasket as if it hadn't been Guy's most sacred possession.
I was along with him, and I simply roared. Guy didn't have the nerve to
ask for it, just stood there looking like the big silly he must have
felt."

The series of reminiscences that this story started lasted all the way
out to the Valley. The red streak of the wintry sunset had faded out of
the west when the car stopped there, and Lloyd looking out into the cold
gray gloaming saw that the snow was beginning to fall again.

"Let's get out and walk the rest of the way," she exclaimed impetuously,
snatching up her jacket and furs as she rose.

"I haven't had a twilight walk in the country this wintah, when it's
all good and gray like this, with snow-flakes in yoah face."

They were off in another instant, and as he stood on the station
platform helping her on with her wraps, she held up her face to feel the
stray flakes blowing cold and soft against it. He smiled at her childish
delight in them, and seeing the smile she started up the narrow path
ahead of him, laughing over her shoulder.

"There's no use denying it," she called back. "When I want to be the
propah dignified young lady I'll have to stay in town. Just the smell of
the country, the fresh earth, the fallen leaves, has such a rejuvenating
effect that I want to tuck up my skirts and skip and run as I used to."

"Come on," he exclaimed gaily, falling in with her mood. "I'll race you
to that dead sycamore up the road."

She looked up at him, her face dimpling as she noticed how he towered
above her and how broad were the shoulders in the big overcoat. Then she
shook her head sadly.

"Nevah again, Bobby! We're too old and dignified. I'd almost as soon
think of racing with the Judge as with you now. What if somebody should
see us? They'd be shocked to death. There's some one now," she added,
peering forward through the dusk.

"Only old Unc' Andy coming back from his rabbit traps," answered Rob, as
the grizzled old coloured man shuffled nearer. Uncle Andy had been the
gardener at Oaklea more years than Lloyd could remember, and now as he
stepped out of the path with elaborate courtesy to let her pass, she
delighted his soul by stopping with a friendly inquiry about himself and
family.

"Lawd, if it aint the Little Cun'l herself!" he chuckled. "All growed up
and a bloomin' like a piney! I reckon, Miss Lloyd, youse forgot the time
that you pulled up all the pansies in my flowah beds 'cause you said
they was makin' faces at you."

"No, indeed, Uncle Andy," she answered with a laugh, and started to pass
on. But the encounter with the old servant seemed somehow to set her
back among the days when she had been almost as much at home at Oaklea
as she was at The Locusts, and prompted by some sudden impulse she
called over her shoulder as she had often called then: "Unc' Andy, tell
Mrs. Moore that Mistah Rob won't be home for dinnah. He's going to stay
at The Locusts."

It was a familiar message although it had been several years since Andy
had heard it. He looked back bowing and scraping, and then walked on
chuckling to himself.

Taken by surprise, Rob did not remonstrate when she thus took his
consent for granted. If she had waited to ask his permission to send
such a message home he would have made some excuse to decline, and then
left her at the gate. That night under the measuring tree when he
listened to her singing he had resolutely made up his mind to keep out
of the way of temptation. Since then he had become convinced that she
was engaged to Leland Harcourt and had put her out of his dreams as far
as possible. Now that she had left him no choice, he gladly accepted the
opportunity that fate seemed to throw in his way, and gave himself up to
the enjoyment of it.

The fitful snow had stopped falling again by the time they reached the
gate, and the stars were beginning to glimmer through the bare branches
of the locust-trees. As Lloyd looked up the avenue, and saw the lights
from many windows streaming out across the white-pillared porch into the
winter night, her gay mood suddenly changed to one of intense feeling.

"Isn't it deah?" she said in a low voice. "I nevah had it come ovah me
so overwhelmingly, how good it is to come back to the things that nevah
change--that nevah fail! The home-lights and the home-loves, the same
old trees and the same old sta'hs and the same old chum!"

Rob made no answer, but his silence was only another proof to Lloyd that
she had found her old chum unchanged. He never answered at the times
when she knew he felt most deeply. Rob's silences expressed more
sometimes than other people's speeches.

He was talkative enough at dinner, however, and between them he and
Lloyd made the meal such a lively one that the old Colonel heaved a sigh
when it was over.

"I'd give a good deal if our whist club didn't meet to-night," he said
in response to Lloyd's question. "I surely would have asked them to
postpone it if I had known you were coming out to-night."

"Suahly not a time-honahed institution like that!" exclaimed Lloyd
teasingly, "and when it's yoah turn to entahtain it. Rob, we haven't
found out what refreshments mothah has for them. Think of wasting all
this time without knowing."

It had always been a matter of interest with them in earlier times to
have a finger in this particular pie. It was one thing in which Mrs.
Sherman was most careful to humour her father's whims, and she always
pleased him by giving her personal attention to the dainty little
suppers which she served after the game.

Lloyd led the way to the pantry and they lifted covers and opened doors,
smelling and peering around till they unearthed all the tempting dishes
that had been so carefully prepared for the occasion.

"We'll be in at the end," warned Lloyd as the Colonel's old cronies
began to arrive, "and in the meantime I'll pop some cawn. I used to
think that old Majah Timberly came for my cawn as much as he did for the
game."

To his great annoyance a telephone message called Mr. Sherman over to
the Confederate Home. He had looked forward to a quiet evening in front
of the great log fire, and was loath to leave the cosy room and cheerful
company. Presently some household matters claimed Mrs. Sherman's
presence up-stairs, and she too had to go, leaving Lloyd at the piano,
playing runs and trills and snatches of songs as a sort of undercurrent
to their conversation. Rob in a big armchair in front of the fire,
looking comfortable enough to want to purr, glanced around the familiar
old room that long association had made as dear to him as home.

"Why don't you read your letters?" he asked, his gaze happening to rest
on a pile of various sized envelopes lying on the table near him, all
bearing Lloyd's name.

She turned around on the piano stool and held out her hand for them as
he rose to take them to her.

"I forgot all about the possibility of there being any mail for me," she
said, tearing open the first one. "This is from Betty. I know you want
to hear that, so I'll read it aloud."

Crossing the room she seated herself under one of the silver sconces in
the chimney corner, so that the candlelight fell on the paper. She had
never relinquished the idea that came to her on her return from school
that Rob was growing especially fond of Betty. It seemed to her such a
desirable state of affairs that she longed to deepen his interest in
her.

"I am not being carried to the skies on flowery beds of ease, by any
manner of means," wrote Betty. "Life at Warwick Hall as a pupil is one
thing. It is quite another to be a teacher. But I'm gaining experience
and that's what I came for, and best of all I'm having some little
successes that make me take heart and feel like attempting more. I have
had two little sketches of school-girl life accepted and _paid for_
(mark the paid for) by the _Youth's Companion_, and a request for more.
'_True hope is swift and flies with swallows' wings. Kings it makes
gods, and meaner creatures kings._' You can imagine how happy I am over
it, and what castles in the air I am already building again."

It was a long newsy letter, telling of a reception she had attended at
the White House, to which she took half a dozen girls in Madam
Chartley's place, and describing a famous lecturer who had been at the
Hall the day before.

"Betty's a girl in a thousand!" said Rob approvingly as she slipped the
letter back in its envelope. "She's a dear little piece, with sense and
pluck enough for a dozen."

His hearty tone confirmed Lloyd's suspicions, and she looked as pleased
as if he had paid her a compliment instead of Betty. She led him on to
express a still deeper appreciation, by telling of some of the things
that Elise Walton had written home about Betty's kindness to the new
girls and how they all adored her. Then she opened the next letter.

"From Phil Tremont," she said, glancing down the page. "He's back in New
York and has just seen Eugenia, who is still delighted with
housekeeping, and makes an ideal home for Stewart and the doctor. And
he's seen Joyce," she added, turning the page, "and Joyce is as happy as
a clam, struggling along with a lot of art-students in a flat, and
really doing well with her book-cover designs and illustrations."

She read a paragraph aloud here and there, then hastily looked over the
last part in silence, laying it down with a little sigh. Rob glanced up
inquiringly. "I wish he wouldn't make such a to-do about my writing moah
regularly. It makes a task of a correspondence instead of a pleasuah, to
know that every two weeks, rain or shine, I'm expected to send an
answah. I like to write if I can choose my own time, and wait till the
spirit moves me, but I despise to be nagged into doing it."

"You write to Betty every week," he suggested.

"Yes, sometimes twice or three times. But that's different. I haven't
seen Phil for two yeahs and when you don't see people for a long time
you can't keep in touch with them."

"The song says, 'Absence makes the heart grow fonder,'" quoted Rob
mischievously.

"Maybe it does if you're old friends, and have lots to remembah
togethah, but it seems to me that absence builds up a sawt of wall
between people sometimes, especially if you've known each othah only a
little while, and at a time when you're both growing up and changing all
the time. Do you know," she added musingly, dropping the letter into her
lap and leaning forward to gaze into the fire, "I believe if Phil and I
had been togethah daily I'd have grown awfully fond of him. When we were
out on the desert in Arizona, I was only fou'teen that spring, he was my
ideal of all that was lovely and romantic, and I believe if it hadn't
been for those talks Papa Jack and I used to have about Hildegarde and
her weaving, I'd have done like foolish Hertha, cut my web for him then
and there. I did imagine for awhile that he was a prince, and the one
written for me in the sta'hs."

"And now?" asked Rob, in a low tone, as if afraid of interrupting the
confession she was making more to the fire and herself than to him.

"Now," she answered, "when he came back to be best man at Eugenia's
wedding I still liked him awfully well, but I could see that my ideals
had changed and that they didn't fit him any moah 'as the falcon's
feathahs fit the falcon.' Still I don't know, maybe if we had been
thrown togethah a great deal from the time I first met him, it might
have been different, but as I say, absence made a sawt of wall between
us and we seem to be growing farthah and farthah apart."

"And now you're sure he's not the one the stars have destined for you?"

"Perfectly suah," she answered with a laugh, then leaning back in the
chimney corner again, opened the third letter. The envelope slipped to
the floor as she read, and stooping over to return it, he saw quite
unintentionally that it bore a South American stamp. She was reading so
intently that she did not notice when he laid it in her lap, but as soon
as she finished she tossed it into the fire without a word. Her face
flushed and her eyes had an angry light in them. As she caught his grave
look, she shrugged her shoulders with a careless little laugh, to hide
the awkward pause, and then said lightly:

"I think Mammy Eastah's fortune will come true. There won't be any
prince in my tea-cup."

"Why?"

"Wait till I get the cawn-poppah and I'll tell you."

She was back in a moment with the popper and several ears of corn which
she divided with Rob, and started to shell into the big dish which she
placed on the floor between them. She shelled in silence a moment or
two.

"It's this wintah in society that's given me that opinion," she said
finally. "The view I've had of it through my Hildegarde mirror. The
knights have come riding, lots of them, and maybe among them I might
have found my prince in disguise, but the shadows of the world blurred
everything. Out heah in the country I'd grown up believing that it's a
kind, honest old world. I'd seen only its good side. I took my
conception of married life from mothah and Papa Jack, Doctah Shelby and
Aunt Alicia, and yoah fathah and mothah. They made me think that
marriage is a great strong sanctuary, built on a rock that no storm can
hurt and no trouble move. But this wintah I found that that kind of
marriage has grown out of fashion. It's something to jest about, and
it's a mattah of scandal and divorce and unhappiness. Sometimes it made
me heart-sick, the tales I heard and the things I saw. I came to
little Mary Ware's conclusion, that it's safah to be an old maid."

[Illustration: "SHE POURED THE CORN INTO THE POPPER AND BEGAN TO SHAKE
IT OVER THE RED COALS."]

Drawing a low stool nearer the fire, she poured the corn into the popper
and began to shake it over the red coals.

"It's dreadful to be disillusioned," said Rob, smiling at her serious
face. "That's one reason why I keep so 'far from the madding crowd.' My
old friends have been good about remembering me with invitations and
I've been sorely tempted to accept some of them just to see what kind of
a show was going on. But I couldn't accept one and refuse another and I
couldn't afford to go in wholesale; carriages and flowers and the bummed
up feeling that follows make it too expensive for a poor man like me.
It's nearly over now, I suppose, anyway."

"Yes, the fancy dress ball on Valentine's night will be the last big
thing befoah Lent."

"Who is to be your escort?"

"Mistah Whitlow, probably. He hasn't asked me yet, but he saw Aunt Jane
this mawning and told her not to let me make any engagement, for he was
coming to ask me as soon as I got back to town Monday."

"Bartrom Whitlow!" exclaimed Rob, shifting his easy lounging position
to an upright one, and looking very stern. "Lloyd, you don't mean to say
you're going with _that_ man! He isn't fit to be invited to decent
people's houses, much less fit to shake hands with their daughters. Some
of the others are bad enough, goodness knows, but he is the limit. You
simply can't go with him."

"Well, you needn't ro'ah so," exclaimed Lloyd with a little pout, as if
she resented his dictatorial, big-brother tone. Secretly it pleased her,
for it had been a long time since she had heard it.

"Rather than let you go with him I'll accept my invitation and take you
myself!"

"What a sweet martyr-like spirit!" laughed Lloyd, teasingly. "I
certainly feel flattered at the way you put it, and I appreciate the
great sacrifice you're willing to make for my sake. Of co'se I don't
want to go with Mistah Whitlow if that's the kind of man he is, but it
seems rathah late in the day to raise a row. He's called on me several
times this wintah and sent me flowahs and danced with me, just as he
does with all the othah girls. I know Aunt Jane believes he is all
right, because she is very particulah about my company. I can't see any
way to get out of going with him as long as she's given him to
undahstand that I would, but for me to hold you to yoah offah and make
you make a martyr of yoahself on the altah of friendship."

"You know very well, Lloyd Sherman, _no_ fellow would count it martyrdom
to escort the most popular débutante of the season to the last great
function."

She opened her eyes wide, astonished at such an unusual thing as a
compliment from Rob.

"Oh, I'm just quoting," he added to tease her. "That's what I heard an
enthusiastic admirer of yours call you on the car this evening. But I'm
in dead earnest, too. My offer is a sincere one."

"Very well," responded Lloyd quickly, "I'll hold you to it. I suppose
you've seriously considahed it. You'll have to go in fancy costume, you
know."

His face showed plainly that he had not thought how much his offer
involved, but after an instant's hesitation he made a wry grimace and
laughed. "That's all right. I die game. I haven't been to anything for
two years, but I'll see you through on this deal. 'I'll never desert
Micawber.' Name the character I'm to represent and I'll get the
costume."

"I think a Teddy beah would be most in keeping if you're going to glowah
and growl the way you did a moment ago, or anything fierce and furious;
Bluebeard for instance. That would be fine, and I'll carry a bloody key
and you can drag me around by the hair as an object lesson to all
thoughtless girls who weave their mantles to fit unworthy shouldahs
instead of using their yah'd sticks to do it right."

"That old tale seems to worry you a lot, Lloyd."

"It does," she confessed. "I've thought about it every day this wintah.
Now this is all ready for the salt and buttah," she added as the last
grain in the wire cage burst into snowy bloom. "I'll take it ovah to the
old gentlemen while it's hot. You can be popping the next lot while I'm
gone."

Mrs. Sherman joined them presently, and the question of costumes was
settled. "There's no use of yoah going to any expense for one," said
Lloyd, with her usual delicate consideration. "There are trunkfuls of
lovely things still in the attic. Come ovah next week and we'll look
through them."

So it came to pass that the old intimacy was, in a measure, resumed, for
several calls were necessary to complete the arrangements for Valentine
night. That those arrangements were highly satisfactory might have been
inferred from the account of the affair which appeared in the Society
columns next day, in which Miss Sherman and Mr. Rob Moore were awarded
the palm for the most unique and striking costumes. They had gone as
Bluebeard and his beautiful Fatima. It was the crowning good time of the
season, Lloyd declared, for Rob under cover of his disguise entered into
the spirit of the occasion with all his old zest, and when Rob tried,
nobody could be better company than he. After that he fell into the way
of an occasional call at The Locusts. He was too busy to spare many
evenings, but when Lloyd came back to the Valley, nearly every Sunday
afternoon was spent in their old way, taking long tramps together
through the quiet country lanes and winter woods.




CHAPTER XIII

THE MIRACLE OF BLOSSOMING


THE beginning of Lent was the end of all the social gaieties and most of
the girls who had flittered through the season with Lloyd fluttered away
like a bevy of scattered butterflies to various resorts on the Florida
coast. Kitty departed to make her long-talked-of visit to Gay in San
Antonio, Katie Mallard went with an invalid aunt to Biloxi, and Lloyd
came back to the country. She was almost as much alone as she had been
that winter when she had not been allowed to return to Warwick Hall
after the Christmas vacation.

True, Allison was at home after her interesting trip abroad, with the
MacIntyres, and Lloyd spent many hours at The Beeches. But Raleigh
Claiborne's sister from Washington was there on a visit part of the
time, and Raleigh himself made several flying trips, and although
Allison's engagement made her doubly interesting to the younger girls,
it seemed to rise up as a sort of wall between them and their old
intimacy. She had so many new interests now that she did not enter quite
so heartily into the old ones.

So it came about that Lloyd fell quite naturally into her former habit
of dropping in to see Mrs. Bisbee and Mrs. Apwell and all the other old
ladies, who welcomed her with open arms. One blowy afternoon in March
she took her embroidery and went to sit with Mrs. Bisbee awhile, beside
the window that Mrs. Walton had laughingly dubbed the "window in
Thrums." The old lady, growing chatty and confidential over her
quilt-piecing, seemed so unusually companionable, that Lloyd remarked:

"It really seems as if I'm catching up to you all, Mrs. Bisbee. As I get
oldah everybody else gets youngah. Why, this wintah mothah has been just
like a sistah. I had no idea she could be so much fun. We do everything
togethah now. I help with the housekeeping so that she can hurry through
with it early in the mawning and then we practise, piano and harp, or
she plays the accompaniments for my songs. And then we read French
awhile and we go for long walks and we discuss every subject undah the
sun, just as Betty and I used to do. And we plan things to do in the
deliciously long cosy evenings--surprises, you know, for grandfathah
and Papa Jack. I believe I'm enjoying this pah't of my yeah bettah than
the first."

Mrs. Bisbee looked out of the window wistfully at nothing.

"That's the way that it used to be here when daughter was at home," she
sighed. "Sometimes I think if I'd had the planning of the universe I'd
have fixed it differently. Just when your little girl is grown up to be
a comfort and a joy, and the best company in the world, some man steps
in and takes her away from you. I had daughter to myself only one short
year after she got through school. Then she married. Of course it would
have been selfish to have stood in the way of her happiness, yet--"

She shook her head with another sigh, and left the sentence unfinished.
"I have often wondered how I could have stood it if her marriage had
been an unhappy one, like poor Amy Cadwell's. You know her."

"Only slightly," answered Lloyd, recalling a face that always aroused
her interest; a face with thin compressed lips and watchful defiant
eyes, that seemed to have grown so from the long guarding of a family
skeleton.

It was not gossip the way Mrs. Bisbee told the story, only the plain
recital of a sad bit of human history that had fallen under her
observation. The cloud of it rested on Lloyd's face as she listened.

"That's the worst thing about growing up," she exclaimed bitterly when
Mrs. Bisbee paused, "the finding out that everybody isn't good and happy
as I used to think they were. Lately, just these last few months that
I've been out in society I've heard so much of people's jealousies and
rivalries and meannesses and insincerity, that I'd sometimes be tempted
to doubt everybody, if it were not for my own family and some of the
people out in this little old Valley that I've trusted all my life.

"There's Minnie Wayland, whose engagement was announced last month to
Mistah Maybrick. I don't see how she dares marry when her own fathah and
mothah made such a failure of it, that they can't live togethah, and
Mistah Maybrick's wife got a divorce from him on account of some
dreadful scandal the papahs were full of. I couldn't go up and wish her
joy when the othah girls did. She talked about it in such a flippant
mattah of business way, as if millions atoned for everything. One of the
girls laughed at me for taking it so seriously, and said that matches
aren't made in heaven nowadays, and that I'd have to get ovah my
old-fashioned Puritanical notions and ideals if I expected to keep up
with the sma'ht set. I thought for awhile that maybe it was only the
sma'ht set who are that way, but what you've just told me about Mrs.
Cadwell, and what I've heard lately about several families right in our
own little neighbahhood, shows that it's _all_ a bad old world, and
these yeahs I've been thinking it so good I've been blind and ignorant.
I suppose it's for the best, but I'm sorry sometimes that my eyes have
been opened."

Mrs. Bisbee sighed again at her vehemence, and then quite unexpectedly
piped up in a thin tremulous voice, with one of the songs of her youth.
In a high minor key and full of quavers, it was so ridiculous that they
both laughed.

    "'I sat beneath a hollow tree,
     The blast it hollow blew.
     I thought upon the hollow world,
     And all its hollow crew.
     Ambition and its hollow schemes,
     The hollow hopes we follow,
     The world and all its hollow dreams--
     All hollow, hollow, hollow!'"

"That's the way it seems to you now," she said. "It's the reaction. But
you mustn't let it make you pessimistic. When you get to feeling like
that you'll have to do like old Abraham did, quit looking at all the
sinners in Sodom, and hunt around for the ten good men."

A whole row of Sunday-school lessons rose up in Mrs. Bisbee's mind. She
had taught a class for thirty years in the vine-covered stone church
whose spire she could see from her window, and Lloyd was used to her
startling and unexpected application of Scripture texts.

"Or better still," she continued, "turn your back on entire Sodom, and
look away to the plains where the faithful pitched their tents. The
world is full of that kind of people to-day as it was then, the faithful
who never join themselves to the idols of the heathen, but who tend
their flocks and live good peaceful lives, and in all their journeyings,
wherever they go, _raise an altar to the Lord_.

"It's the marriages that are founded on _that_ rock that never fall,"
she added reverently, her mind skipping from the tent-dwellers of
Genesis to the wise builder in the parables with the ease of long
practice. "'_And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not; for it was founded upon
a rock._'"

"Sometimes just the wife's part is built on it. She's the only one that
raises the altar. Sometimes the man is the one. Of course that's better
than all being on the sand, and saves many a marriage from being the
wreck it would have been if they'd left God out of it altogether. There!
I never did think it all out in words quite as straight and clear and
convincing to myself before. But I've often had the idea come to me when
I'd be sitting in church looking at old Judge Moore's white head in the
front pew, and thinking of the trouble _he'd_ had--the sorrow and
accidents and misfortune that have beat on _his_ house--and his faith
standing up bigger and stronger than ever. Even his wife's death
couldn't shake it."

Here she paused to lean nearer the window and nod and smile at some one
driving past the house.

"It's Agnes Waring," she explained, as Lloyd looked up too late. "Or
Agnes Bond, I should say. I never can remember to call her that,
although she's been married over two years. Now _there's_ a happy
marriage if ever there was one. The good old-fashioned sort like the
Judge's, for they're both of the faithful. And do you know, my dear,"
she continued lightly, "I shall always hold you responsible for that. It
was your making such a picture out of Agnes at that Martha Washington
affair that brought her out of her shell and gave John Bond a chance to
discover her. Miss Sarah thinks so too. By the way, she was here
yesterday, and she told me that she has about consented to break up
housekeeping and go to live with Agnes. It's so lonely for her since
poor Miss Marietta died."

"Yes, I know," said Lloyd softly, thinking of the happy release that had
come to Miss Marietta only the week before.

"Now, there was another case," resumed Mrs. Bisbee. "Nobody who saw her
lying there in that beautiful dress that was to have been her wedding
gown, and with that wonderful smile lighting up her face, could doubt
what sort of a foundation she and Murray Cathright built on. That was a
love that outlasted time and reached past even death into eternity
itself. So don't you go to doubting that it doesn't exist any more, my
dear."

Lloyd made one more call on the way home, stopping in at the Apwalls'
with a magazine which Mrs. Bisbee had asked her to leave. Oddly enough
the conversation turned to the same subject that she and Mrs. Bisbee had
been discussing, but she went away in a very different mood from the one
in which she left the first place. Old Mr. Apwall irritated her. He was
in one of his sprightly facetious humours, when he delighted in making
personal remarks in a teasing way.

"Well, my little lady," he began. "I hear you've had a whole string of
admirers dangling in your wake this last year. Oh, you needn't deny it!"
he added, shaking a finger at her in a way he considered playful. "We've
heard the gossip about that young Texas fellow and that man from the
North who nearly wore out his private car coming down to see you every
whip-stitch and that old duck from Cincinnati that you refused. Refused
them all! Oh, yes, you did, though. We heard about it. But you must
remember the story of the lass who went through the forest looking for a
straight stick. She kept throwing them away and throwing them away,
getting harder to please at every step, until she'd gone through the
whole forest, and had to pick up a crooked one at the last."

He laughed childishly at his own tale. "Look out that you don't get a
crooked stick!"

Mrs. Apwall broke in sourly. "That's about all there is left lying
around to choose from these days, to _my_ notion. But land sakes,
Alexander, quit teasing the child. You talk as if all her chances are
gone by and that she's doomed to be an old maid. The happiest lot of
all, _I_ say, for there's no man living but has some crook in him, and
most of 'em are all crookedness." She darted a warlike glance in his
direction.

Lloyd left as soon as she could get away politely, wondering how they
had heard so much of her affairs. She had refused both proposals, but
she didn't know that any one outside the family knew anything about it.
She wondered now if she had been over particular, for the crook that
Mrs. Apwall insisted was in every man was only a slight one in the case
of the owner of the private car, principally a matter of little
refinements of speech and appearance which one had a right to expect of
a man in his position and whose lack argued to a dainty girl like Lloyd
some corresponding coarseness of nature. She had seen the other man
slightly intoxicated one night at a theatre party, and could never quite
forget the maudlin smile with which he poured out complimentary speeches
by the wholesale.

The conversation at the Apwalls' brought back two very disagreeable
occasions that she did not care to remember, and she made up her mind as
she walked rapidly along towards home that it would be many a day before
she went back there. They always gave her a gloomy impression of life.

The roads were so muddy that she had to take to the railroad track,
stepping from one cross-tie to another to avoid the sharp cinders
between. Presently she found herself walking along the rail as she and
Betty used to do on the way to school, balancing themselves with
outstretched arms and counting how many steps they could take without
slipping off. That was the way she and Rob had taken their walk the week
before. It had been too muddy to go anywhere save along the track and
they had walked the cross-ties for two miles in the face of a keen March
wind. It was soft and balmy to-day, fluttering her hair and skirts in a
playful way wholly unlike the boisterous flapping with which it had
ushered in the month.

As she went along she peered into fence corners and up at the budding
branches, happy over every sign of spring. If the roads were dry enough
by the end of the week she and Rob intended to take a long tramp through
Tanglewood in search of wild flowers. Anemones, harebells and
spiderwort, foxgloves and dog-tooth violets, she knew them all, and the
haunts where they came the earliest. She rarely gathered them, but went
from one hiding-place to another for a glimpse of their shy faces,
welcoming them as she would old friends. Lloyd loved the woods like an
Indian, and one of the most satisfactory things about Rob's
companionship was that he enjoyed them in the same way. Often they
tramped along, scarcely saying a word a mile, finding the vibrant
silences of the wood better than speech, and their mutual pleasure in
them sufficient. After the winter in town, which had been an unusually
cold and severe one, Lloyd longed for the beginning of spring, and from
the call of the first robin and the budding of the first pussy-willow,
spent as much time as possible out of doors.

April came in with a week of sunny days which hurried everything into
luxuriant leafage and bud. When Rob came over one warm day for his usual
Sunday afternoon walk, the whole world seemed so near the verge of
bursting into full bloom that the very air was aquiver with its
half-whispered secrets. Faint delicious odours stole up from the moist
earth and the green growing things that crowded up out of it. Even the
old locusts, conscious of a hidden wealth of sweetness which was soon to
make a glory of their gnarled branches, nodded in sympathy with all that
was young and riotous.

There were so many things to discover near at hand that Lloyd and Rob
sauntered about the place first, before starting farther afield. There
were spring beauties covering the little knolls in the pasture, like a
fall of rosy snow. There were violets down by the ice-house, and early
columbines starting out from the crevices of the rockery, holding up
slender stems, whereon by and bye their airy blossoms would poise like a
flock of light-winged butterflies. Lloyd, happy over every tiny frond
she found unfolding itself in the fern bed, and every yellow dandelion
that added its mite of gold to the young year's coffers, was so absorbed
in her quest that she did not notice any difference in Rob's manner.

He walked along beside her, saying little, but with the same air of
repressed eagerness that the whole April day seemed to share, as if like
the locusts, he too was conscious of some inner wealth of bloom, some
secret happiness whose time for sharing with the spring had not yet
come. Once when he answered her enthusiastic discovery of a snowdrop
with only an absent-minded monosyllable, she glanced up at him
curiously. There was such a light in his eyes and such an unwonted
tenderness in his expression that she wondered what he could be thinking
about.

Across the pasture they went, down through the orchard where the
peach-trees were turning pink and the clusters of tiny white plum buds
were already calling the bees, and around again to the beech-grove at
the back of the house. It was a sweet flower-starred way, and Lloyd,
bubbling over with the spirit of the hour, began to hum a happy little
tune. Suddenly she stopped short in the path, turning her head slightly
with the alert motion of a young fawn.

"What is it that smells so delicious?" she demanded. "It's almost
heavenly, it's so sweet." Then after another long indrawn breath, "I'd
think it was lilies-of-the-valley if it were any place but out heah on
the edge of the wood-lot. They _couldn't_ be way out heah. It must be
some rare kind of wild flowah we've nevah discovered."

Leaving the path, they both began searching through the underbrush,
pushing aside the dead leaves, and stooping now and then to examine some
plant that did not seem entirely familiar.

"I'm positive it's a _white_ flowah," declared Lloyd, closing her eyes
and drawing in another breath of the faint, elusive fragrance. "Only a
white flowah could have such an ethereal odah. It makes you think of
white things, doesn't it? Snow crystals and angel wings! Oh, they _are_
lilies-of-the-valley!" she cried the next instant, stooping over a bed
of green from which Rob was raking the dead leaves with a stick.

"And don't you remembah now," she cried, her eyes like eager stars as
she recalled the incident, "_we_ planted them heah ourselves, yeahs ago.
I remembah digging up a whole apronful of some thrifty green things out
of the flowah bed undah yoah mothah's window and lugging them ovah home
all the way from Oaklea. You planted them in this place for me, because
we thought we'd build a play-house heah, but aftahwards we changed our
minds and built it by the grape-vine swing."

"It seems to me I do have a faint recollection of something of that
sort," Rob answered. "I know I had a row with Unc' Andy once for digging
up some of his pet borders and transplanting them over here, but I
didn't know they were lilies."

"I suppose we didn't know because we nevah happened to wandah this way
aftahward when they were in bloom," she continued, seating herself
beside them and parting the thickest sheaths of green to reveal the
perfect white flowers hidden away among them. Throwing aside her hat,
she bent over to thrust her face into their midst, revelling in the
purity and exquisite fragrance.

"There's nothing like them!" she exclaimed, so intent on the beauty of
the tiny white bells that she did not see the expression with which Rob
was looking down on her. There was a likeness between the two, he was
thinking, the white-gowned girl and the white, white blossoms. They
seemed spiritually akin. She touched one of the racemes softly.

"It's a miracle, isn't it!" she said in a low, reverent tone.

"A miracle that anything so sweet and white and perfect can suddenly
come into being like this. It must have made those old lily bulbs wondah
at themselves the first time they unfolded and woke up to find that such
a heavenly thing had happened to them,--their hearts filled with this
unearthly beauty and sweetness. Don't you suppose it made the whole
world seem different, that they're not yet done wondering ovah the
surprise and joy of it?"

She said it with a shy side-glance as if half-afraid he would laugh at
such a childish fancy. Then she looked up startled, at the unexpected
intensity of his answer.

"I _know_ it made the whole world different," he said in such a strange
exultant voice that she hardly knew it for Rob's. Dropping to one knee
beside her he singled out one of the lilies just beginning to burst
from its sheath, and folded it close shut again in its green leaves.

"Look!" he said in the same exultant voice. "That's the way I've been
for years, with something hidden away in my heart, unrecognized at
first, then its sweetness only half-guessed at. And I kept it hid, and I
thought never to tell you. But this morning in church it happened to
_me_, this miracle of blossoming. I was sitting looking at you as I've
done a thousand times before, and all of a sudden it came over me, just
as sweet and unexpected as the bursting of these lilies, the knowledge
that life is dear and the world beautiful because _you_ are in it. I
think I've always held the thought of you in my heart, Lloyd, but it has
come to such full flower now, dear, I couldn't hide it from you long,
even if I tried. It seems to me now that all of my life must have been a
gradual growing up for this one thing--to love you!"

Then his face, glowing with an eager gladness that almost transfigured
it, paled a little before the mute misery in hers.

"Oh, Rob!" she stammered, finding it hard to believe that she had heard
aright. "_Don't_ tell me that! I've always loved you deahly, but not
_that_ way." Then as she saw all the light fade out of his eyes and his
face settle into grim stern lines, she reached out both hands crying,
"Oh, you deah old Bobby! I wouldn't have had it happen for the world! I
can't _beah_ to hurt you this way!"

Her eyes filled and two big tears splashed down on the hands she had
thrust impulsively into his. With a gentleness that stirred her even
more than his words had done, he bent and touched them with his lips.

"Never mind, dear," he said with a great tenderness that brought a sob
up into her throat. "Don't think of it any more if it makes you unhappy.
If you could have loved me it would have been heaven, but as you can't
we won't talk about it any more. And--I still have my miracle. Nothing
can change that."

She could not answer, the tears came crowding so fast, and as they
walked back towards the house together all the brightness seemed to have
dropped out of the April day. The sweetness of the lilies still followed
them, however, and when she glanced around, wondering why, she saw that
Rob still held the one he had knelt to pick for her. He twirled it
absently in his fingers, but as they parted at the steps he held it out
to her with a smile so tender and full of understanding, that another
sob came up in her throat and she took it without a word.




CHAPTER XIV

THE ROYAL MANTLE


THE week that followed was an unhappy one for Lloyd. Everywhere she went
it seemed to her that lilies-of-the-valley were thrust into her face. On
the way to town people got on the car at nearly every station with great
bunches of them that they were carrying to offices or to their friends.
The florists' windows were full of them. Men passed her on the street
wearing them on their coats, and even the little shop-girl, who waited
on her at the ribbon counter, had them stuck in her belt. When she
called at Mrs. Bisbee's there was a box of them growing on her
window-sill, and at home the whole house was permeated by the fragrance
that floated out from the great crystal bowl on the library table. She
could not get away from them, and they kept Rob constantly in her
thoughts.

She told herself that she had never known anything quite so considerate
and sweet as the way he had taken her answer. The more she thought of
his quick putting aside of self in order that she might not be unhappy,
the more it grieved her that he must be disappointed. She did not see
him again until the following Sunday. He came into church behind the old
Judge and Mrs. Moore, and Lloyd dropped her eyes to her hymn-book, her
heart in such a flutter that it sent a queer little tingle all over her.
She was afraid to meet his glance, for fear the consciousness of their
last meeting would send the telltale red to her face.

In the pew just behind the Moores' sat Katie Mallard with a girl from
Frankfort, who was visiting her, and as Rob took his seat Lloyd saw the
guest's pretty eyes fixed inquiringly on him. Then she whispered
something to Katie behind her fan. Instantly the wonder crossed Lloyd's
mind what the newcomer thought of him, and then she wondered how he
would appear to her if she could see him with the eyes of a stranger,
without the intimate knowledge their long acquaintance had given her.

She stole a glance in his direction, as the organist pulled out the
stops and struck the opening chords of the voluntary. He was certainly
good to look at, and, she concluded, the veriest stranger, if he were
any judge at all of such things, must see at a glance that his was a
strong character, that he would scorn to do a dishonourable thing and
that the years behind him were clean and honest. Then with a start she
realized that she had been holding him up to her silver yardstick, and
that he not only met its three requirements, but went far beyond. He had
family, social position, everything that her father had desired for her
save wealth, and she remembered how earnestly he had added, on that
solemn watch-night, "but all these are nothing when weighed in the
balance with the love of an honest man."

This greatest of all had been given her, but she could not accept
because--well, she didn't know why--but probably because it was just
_Bobby_ who had offered it, and she couldn't think of _him_ as being the
one the stars had destined for her--a boy that she had made mud pies
with. The old Hildegarde story had been good for her in many ways, but
it had made the prince of her dreams a vague personality unlike any man
she had ever met. She had never put into words, even to herself, what
she expected him to be like, but the shadowy image that her imagination
sometimes held up had no flaw like ordinary mortals, no human faults
and failings. And she would know him when he came, in some strange,
mysterious way that needed no speech--his coming would be heralded like
Hebe's: "_Before her ran an influence sweet, that bowed my heart like
barley bending._"

The congregation rose for the Gloria and her eyes met Rob's. For one
instant in the quick lighting of his face she had a revelation of all
that his "miracle of blossoming" meant to him, then he flashed her a
reassuring smile that seemed to say: "Never mind, old chum. We'll go on
just as we've always done."

That she had interpreted it aright Lloyd knew when he came that
afternoon as usual and proposed a walk over past the Lindsey Cabin. He
seemed to have put himself into her place so fully that he understood
just how she felt towards him; knew that it hurt her to have to withhold
the one great thing he desired, and that his friendship was still as
dear to her as ever. So with a fine consideration that she was quick to
appreciate, he came back to his old place so naturally, and as such a
matter of course, that it put her at her ease with him and made it
possible for her to ignore the episode of the lilies as if it had never
been.

May came with its locust blossoms and the birthday anniversary that
made her "old and twenty." One of her gifts was a beautiful
saddle-horse, and she began her daily rides again. Several times when
Rob could arrange to leave town earlier than usual he rode with her.

Early in June Betty wrote that she was going up into the pine woods of
Maine for her vacation. She had been offered a position to teach an hour
a day in a sort of summer school, a girls' camp, and the position had
too many advantages to refuse. She would be back in time for a week or
ten days at The Locusts before the opening of the fall term at Warwick
Hall. Lloyd, who had looked forward to Betty's companionship for the
entire summer, was sorely disappointed. The same day that that letter
came, Rob told her that he was going away for awhile. Some investments
his father had made years ago had turned out to be worth investigating,
and he was sure he could dispose of them advantageously. At any rate he
was going to Birmingham to try. He might be back in a week or two, and
he might be away the entire month of June. If Betty had been at home
probably Lloyd would not have missed him at all, but because she had to
take so many of her walks and rides alone, he was often in her
thoughts.

"I can't expect to have every summah as gay as last one was," she said
to herself one morning, as she busied herself about her room, changing
the arrangement of the pictures. She leaned over to dust the ones above
her low bookcase. They ran in a long panel, just above it, the series of
garden fancies that Leland Harcourt had suggested. It was on a June
morning like this almost a year ago that she had posed for some of them
in Doctor Shelby's old garden. It seemed at least four times as long as
that. She had grown so much older and wiser. She stooped to look again
at the picture of Darby and Joan, under which was written, "Hand in hand
while our hair is gray." As she passed her duster lightly over the glass
which covered the two dear old faces, she remembered that next week this
devoted couple were to celebrate their golden wedding, and that she had
promised to let them "borrow" her for a whole week before, to help with
the preparations.

An hour later she was opening the gate that led to the old-fashioned
door where the ugly little Chinese idol still kept guard and held it
open. She found Mrs. Shelby out on her cool upper piazza, behind the
moon-vines, in a low sewing chair. She was stitching daintily away on a
bit of fine linen. "A wristband for one of Richard's shirts," she
explained, after her first moments of delighted greeting. "And I'll go
right on with it, for I'm making him a set all by hand for my
anniversary present to him. He's always been so proud of my needlework
and had so much sentiment for the things I've made myself. I can't begin
to tell you how glad I am to have you here. I've been sitting here all
morning thinking that if my little Alicia had lived what an interest she
would have taken in all my preparations. I keep forgetting that she
wouldn't be a young girl like you. It's Alicia's granddaughter who would
have been your age."

It took only a question or two to open the gates into this gentle old
soul's happy yesterdays, and Lloyd listened and questioned, enjoying the
quiet romance that she gathered bit by bit as one gathers the posies of
an old garden and clasps them into a full-rounded nosegay.

"Aunt Alicia," she asked presently, "were you _suah_ at the time that
you were making no mistake? Didn't you have any doubts or misgivings
about the doctah's being the right one?"

Mrs. Shelby laughed. "I must confess that I was a very silly girl who
had read so many sentimental stories that my head was full of dreams of
some faultless being who should appear like the prince to the Sleeping
Beauty and change the whole world for me with a kiss. It was a long time
before I could recognize him in the disguise of a poor country doctor.
But I think we are apt to be that way about most things in life, my
dear. Familiarity disguises the real worth of most of our blessings. We
don't appreciate them till we are forced to miss them for awhile."

"But what finally showed you?" persisted Lloyd. "What made you see
through the disguise?"

"Oh, my dear," laughed Mrs. Shelby again. "I couldn't explain a thing
like that! How do these moon-flowers know what calls them to open, or
the tide when it is time to rise? They _feel_ it, I suppose. They just
_know_! That is the way it was with me."

Lloyd came again next day prepared to spend the week. It would be hard
to tell who enjoyed the visit the most. Gentle Aunt Alicia fluttered
around, hugging the sweet pretence to her heart that for this little
space at least she had a real own daughter beside her, hers to call upon
for any service that the little Alicia would have gladly tendered. The
old doctor spent every moment he could spare from his office in the
spacious screened porch leading from the kitchen, where all the
preparations were carried gaily forward.

Here, after the invitations were sent, Lloyd spent her time. Under her
supervision the old satin wedding gown was brought out and aired and
pressed and slightly altered. Its white folds had turned to a mellow
ivory in the years it had been laid away, just as the sentiment which
cherished it had grown deeper and richer with time. Once as Lloyd
intercepted a glance the old doctor exchanged with his wife as they
brought out these reminders of their far-away bridal, it made her feel
that she was touching with intimate fingers the heart of a sweet and
tender old romance.

From the yellowed pages of an old diary, she read a description of the
original wedding feast, and with an enthusiasm which went ahead of Mrs.
Shelby's own prepared to copy it in every detail for the golden wedding.
Jellies and cakes and salads, candied rose-leaves and rare spiced
confections that had graced the first were all reproduced for this great
occasion. Lloyd beat eggs and shelled nuts and stirred icing with a
zest, while she planned the decorations and gave orders right and left
to a household who joyed to do her bidding.

It was not until next to the last great day that Mrs. Shelby made the
discovery they had overlooked a certain gold-cake, whose recipe was
missing. "And I don't suppose it's to be found anywhere in the Valley,"
she mourned, "unless they've kept Phronie Moore's old cook-book. She was
one of my bridesmaids, and she made it with her own hands. It was one of
her own special recipes that she was noted for, and I wouldn't have lost
it for anything."

"You know the Judge must have kept it, Alicia," the old doctor gently
insisted. "You know the slightest thing she ever handled was sacred to
him, and it stands to reason that anything she'd taken so much pride in,
and written every page with her own hands, as you say, would be
preserved. No doubt his daughter-in-law can find it for you without the
least trouble."

"Even if she could I wouldn't want to borrow it," began Mrs. Shelby, but
Lloyd interrupted briskly. "I'll fix it all right for you, Aunt Alicia.
I'll run right ovah to Oaklea as soon as Daphne gets this in the oven,
and ask Mrs. Moore to let me copy the recipe for you."

So that is how it came about that late that afternoon, Lloyd opened the
great iron gate at Oaklea, and, following the familiar path under the
giant oaks, reached the house to which she had long been a stranger.

Rob's dog, a fine Gordon setter, came out with a boisterous barking, but
seeing who it was, leaped up, licking her hands and wagging a friendly
welcome. It seemed as if Rob ought to be somewhere near. Everything
about the place suggested him. A familiar wide-brimmed gray hat lay on
the hall table, his riding-whip beside it. Up-stairs whither the
coloured maid led her, there were other reminders of him: Indian clubs
and a tennis racquet in a corner of the hall, and a cabinet holding the
various collections that had been his fads from time to time.

"Come in here, dear," called Mrs. Moore from the depths of a sleepy
hollow chair. "I'm too tired to move, so I knew you'd excuse my sending
down for you to come up-stairs."

It was Rob's room into which she was ushered. Mrs. Moore held out both
cordial hands without rising, and drew her down for a kiss.

"Rob's coming home to-night," she explained, "so of course everything
had to be swept and garnished for so grand an occasion, and I've nearly
used myself up making things fine in his honour."

Her eyes filled with tears. "It's the first time he's been away since
the dear 'Daddy' left us, and I had no idea four weeks could be such an
age. I'm so excited and happy over his coming that I can scarcely talk
about it calmly. But you know what a dear good son my 'Robin Adair' is
to me, so you can make allowances for a fond mother's foolishness."

It was some moments before Lloyd had an opportunity to make known her
errand, apologizing profusely for putting her to any exertion when she
was so tired.

"Oh, it's no trouble," answered Mrs. Moore. "I think I know right where
to put my hand on the book in father's room. I'll step across the hall
and see."

Left to herself Lloyd gave a shy glance around the room, remembering the
time when it had been a familiar playground, but now she had an
embarrassed sense of intruding. Many an hour she had spent romping in it
while Mom Beck and Dinah gossiped by the fire. They had had their
menagerie and lions' den in that curtained alcove. Here on the hard-wood
floor between the chimney-corner and the window they had chalked the
ring for their marble games. She leaned over and examined the floor at
her feet with a smile. Those were undoubtedly the dents that their
top-spinning had left. Mom Beck had told them at the time, no amount of
polishing could ever wipe out such holes.

The little tin soldiers that used to stand guard on the window-sill had
given place to other things now. The rocking-horse that had carried them
such long journeys of adventure together had been stabled for years in
the attic at The Locusts. College trophies and pennants hung on the
walls. A rifle and a shotgun stood in the corner where a wooden gun and
a toy sword used to stay. The low table and the picture books had given
place to a massive desk and rows on rows of heavy volumes bound in
leather.

Then she recognized several things belonging to a later period. There
was the shaving-paper case she made him the day he bought his first
razor. She had been so proud of the monogram she burnt into the leather.
It looked decidedly amateurish to her now. On the leather couch among
its many cushions was the pillow she had embroidered in his fraternity
colours and sent to him while he was at college.

Between the front windows where the desk stood, and just above it, ran
four long rows of photographs set in narrow panels. Most of them were
group pictures, the first dating back to the time of her first
house-party, and ending with some that had been taken the week of
Eugenia's wedding. It was like a serial story of all their good times,
and hastily changing her seat she leaned her elbows on the desk for
another look. But the nearer view revealed something that she had not
seen at the first glance. _She_ was the central figure of every group.
It was _her_ face that one noticed first, laughing back from every
picture.

Abashed at her discovery, she scuttled back to her former seat, but not
before her quick glance had showed her another photograph on the desk,
in a silver frame. It was the last one Miss Marks had taken of her, in
her commencement gown. She did not know that Rob had one of them. She
had not given it to him.

Mrs. Moore called out something to her from across the hall, and as she
turned to reply she faced still another picture of herself, this one in
an old-fashioned silver locket swinging from the side of the mirror. It
was the Princess Winsome with the dove. She was afraid to look any
further. She felt like an eavesdropper, for the very walls were calling
out to her those words of Rob's that she had been trying for weeks to
forget: "All my life seems to have been a growing up for this one
thing--to love you!"

She sprang up with the impulse to leave the room, to get away from these
telltale voices that she had no right to listen to. But just then Mrs.
Moore came back with the book.

"You can copy it here at the desk," she said, laying out a sheet of
paper and Rob's big heavy-handled pen. She did not sit down while Lloyd
wrote the few lines, but stood with her hand on the back of the chair
till she had finished. Then she said with an amused smile, "I want to
show you something funny, Lloyd. I came across it this morning while I
was looking over some old things of Rob's. It's your first piece of
needlework. You made it over here one rainy day under Mom Beck's
instructions. It's so long ago I suppose you've forgotten, but I
remember that Rob tried to make one too, and stuck his fingers so often
that he cried and gave it up, and you gave him yours to comfort him."

Opening a box which she brought from some drawer, she took out a sorry
little pin-cushion. All puckered and drawn, its long straggling stitches
scarcely kept in place the cotton with which it was stuffed. The faded
blue silk was streaked and dirty as if it had been used for a foot-ball
at some stage of its existence, and the pins that formed the crooked
letter L had rusted in their places. But that it was accounted something
precious, one could see from the way in which it was tied and wrapped
and carefully put away in this box by itself.

It was a relief to Lloyd to find that Mrs. Moore did not attach any
significance to the fact that Rob thus treasured her old gift. She only
laughed and said he was like her in that regard. She couldn't bear to
throw away anything connected with his childhood. Only that morning she
had come across the little blue shoes that he had learned to walk in,
and nearly cried over them, they recalled so plainly those happy days.

"We are both full of sentiment for old things," she continued. "I
believe it will hurt him nearly as much as me if we decide to leave
Oaklea and try to make a home somewhere else."

"Leave Oaklea!" repeated Lloyd wonderingly.

"Yes, Rob has had such a splendid opening offered him in Birmingham that
he has been strongly tempted to move there. Oh, I haven't told you the
good news, have I! He succeeded in selling that property to a big
corporation that needed it to extend their manufactories, and was able
to get such a fine figure for it that now he can give up that horrid
grind in the hardware business and go away in the fall for the last year
of his law course. He has studied so hard with his grandfather that this
one year is all that is necessary, and he will be the youngest lawyer to
be admitted to the Louisville bar when he gets through. His grandfather
is prouder of that possibility than anything else connected with the
boy."

"But about your going away," began Lloyd, anxiously, when she had
expressed proper interest in the news. "Oaklea won't be the same place
with strangahs living heah. I can't imagine such a thing."

"It isn't settled yet," Mrs. Moore answered cheerfully, and then rambled
on to some other topic. But Lloyd heard no word of what she was saying.
A sudden panic had seized her at the possibility of Rob's being taken
out of her life for ever. The bare thought gave her a sinking of the
heart and a sense of desolation such as a little child might have at
being left alone in the dark. As she sat there trying to imagine how it
would seem never to see him again, such a revelation of her own self
came to her that it sent the colour surging up in her face and set her
heart to fluttering like a startled bird. She knew now for whom she had
been weaving all these years. This moment of self insight had torn away
the disguise. _Her Prince had come into his kingdom!_

A pause in Mrs. Moore's remarks brought the embarrassing knowledge that
she had not heard the question whose reply was being waited for, and she
started to stammer some incoherent excuse, when a shrill whistle from
below made them both start. The familiar sound was followed by a joyous
barking from the Gordon setter, and then Rob's voice called gaily,
"Where are you, mother? Six whole hours ahead of time, just to surprise
you!"

Mrs. Moore sprang up, all her weariness forgotten, and ran down-stairs
to meet him. Lloyd stood hesitating in the middle of the floor. She
didn't want to intrude on this meeting, yet she couldn't stay there in
his room, the room that babbled his secrets and reflected him on every
side like a mirror. Still hesitating, then going forward and halting
again, she reached the landing midway on the stairs and saw him standing
with his arm around his mother, who had forgotten everything else save
the joy of his return.

Then he glanced up and saw her standing there, one hand on the polished
rail, and her white dress trailing down the steps behind her. And the
late afternoon sunshine stealing through the amber medallion window
above her rested with such soft touch on her fair hair that it seemed
that a halo of dim gold surrounded her. For an instant he thought he
must be dreaming, and stood gazing at her with a look of happy wonder as
if this were only another vision of the dream-saint always enshrined in
his heart.

But his next glance showed him that it was Lloyd in reality, for at his
adoring gaze she went all rosy red, and looked away in shy confusion.
Stopping only for the briefest greeting, she hurried past him, saying
that Aunt Alicia was waiting, and the wonderful cake wouldn't be done in
time, that his mother would tell him about it, and she'd see him at the
wedding to-morrow.

What happened afterward was all a sort of golden haze to Lloyd. The
afternoon of the anniversary came and went. She greeted the guests who
came in a constant stream with their gifts and good wishes. She sang the
old songs when they asked her to, she saw that every one was served to
the sumptuous refreshments in the dining-room; she played her rôle of
daughter of the house to such perfection that Aunt Alicia caught her
hand gratefully every time she passed, and followed her with loving
eyes as she flitted from room to room. She carried away the impression
that it was all a beautiful sacred occasion, for the whole Valley bared
its heart for that little space to show its love for the good doctor who
for half a century had been its standby in its times of stress and
anxiety and bitter bereavement.

Yet the only moment that stood out quite clearly was the one when Rob
passed down the receiving line and stopped for a word about the perfect
June day, and how sweet the white-haired bride of fifty years looked in
her old-time satin gown and white roses. Lloyd had answered gaily,
fluttering her fan and adjusting the slender bracelet on her arm, in a
careless way, but she had not looked up at him in her usual
straightforward fashion.

The festivities were not extended into the evening. Because Aunt Alicia
was not strong the invitations were only for the afternoon, and by
sundown the last guest had departed. Even Lloyd went, saying merrily
that she left them to begin their second honeymoon, but that she would
be back next morning to help put things in order.

There was company at The Locusts that night, some business acquaintances
of Mr. Sherman's whom he had invited to dinner, and who were interested
in nothing but statistics about the South and other like stupid things.
Tired by the day's exhausting demands, Lloyd left them when they went
into the drawing-room, and stepping out on the porch sat down on the
steps. The moon was coming up, turning the locusts to silver.

Presently she heard the sound of hoof-beats down the pike, and as she
listened a solitary horseman turned in at the gate. She was not
expecting Rob, but even at that distance she recognized the familiar
slouch of his broad-brimmed hat and the erect way he sat in the saddle.
And she knew before a word was spoken, the moment he dismounted and
stood before her that he had not come for a call, only to bring some
message. But he did not deliver it at once, only asked who the guests
were, and sat down beside her on the steps and talked about the trivial
happenings of the afternoon.

Then a few minutes later she was walking along beside him under the
locusts. The moonlight lay in silver patches among the black shadows and
the air was heavy with the breath of roses. They stopped at the old
measuring tree, and Rob dropped the light tone in which he had been
jesting, and his face grew tense in his deep earnestness.

"It's no use trying any longer, Lloyd," he said abruptly. "I can't give
you up. The golden wedding to-day was too much for me." He took a step
nearer. "Dear, isn't there _anything_ I could do to make myself worthier
in your sight? In the old days knights could go out and _prove_ their
valour and fealty. Couldn't you give me some such chance? Set me a task?
I'd go to the world's end to do it!"

Lloyd did not answer for a moment. Leaning against the trunk of the
gnarled locust, she stood idly tracing the outline of the four-leaf
clover that he had cut beside the date the last time they measured
there. Then she said in a low tone:

"Yes, you can bring me the diamond leaf that we've talked about so
often. By that token you'd prove that you were not only a true knight,
but that all these yeahs you've been my prince in disguise."

He smiled ruefully, thinking she had purposely set him a hopeless task.
They had read the legend together, and he knew full well that Abdallah
found the diamond leaf of happiness only in Paradise, but he took out
his watch and opened the back of the case, saying hopefully, "My lucky
charm has never failed me yet, how long will you give me to find it?"

She held out her hand for the little talisman, the four-leaf clover she
had given him so many years ago, but as he picked it up, the dry leaves
crumbled to dust at his touch, and only one fell unbroken into her
outstretched palm.

"My good omen has failed me when I needed it most!" he said bitterly,
but Lloyd answered shyly, "No, don't you see? This is the _fo'th_ leaf.
You have brought me what I asked for."

For an instant he stood there, an incredulous joy dawning in his face,
then grasping the little hand that closed over the clover, he asked
wonderingly, "And my unworthy shoulders really fit your royal mantle
_now_, dear? You are sure?"

She looked up at him then, not a doubt in her trusting face as she
slowly made answer, "Yes, Rob, 'as the falcon's feathahs fit the
falcon!'"

And then the old locusts, looking down on the ending of a story that
they had watched from its beginning, stopped their swaying for a space,
with a soft "Sh!" each to each as one lays finger on lip in holy
places.




CHAPTER XV

"AS IT WAS WRITTEN IN THE STARS" AND BETTY'S DIARY


"THE lights are out and gone are all the guests." It is very late, but I
must sit up and write the full account of it while it is all fresh and
clear in my mind. Besides I am too wide awake to sleep even if I should
try. It was a beautiful, beautiful wedding; but I must go back ever so
far if I am to have no gaps in this record.

It is three years now since I went away to Warwick Hall to teach; full,
hard years, but so rich in experiences and so helpful in my work that
I'd gladly go on with them if I were not needed here at home. But they
do need me now that Lloyd is married and gone, and although she has not
gone far and will be in and out every day, and her room is just as she
left it, and her place will always be hers, still I am the daughter of
the house in many ways, and can in a measure make up to godmother and
Papa Jack all they have done for me. I think they do feel repaid to a
great extent by my little successes and the prospect of more to follow
by and by. It made me so glad and proud when I heard Papa Jack telling
the doctor to-day about the essays the _Atlantic_ had accepted of mine,
and how pleased he was over the series of sketches that the New York
publishers are going to bring out in book form in time for the holidays.
The same publishers that refused my poor old novel too.

It does not seem possible that two years and a half have gone by since
Lloyd wrote to me of her engagement, but it seemed a long time to look
forward to then. Her father and mother would not have consented to give
her up any sooner even if Rob had been in a position to ask it. Now he
has been a member of his grandfather's firm for a full year, and
everybody says he is one of the most promising young lawyers ever
admitted to the Louisville bar. He has gone into his life work as he
went into all his games--to win! And he is so big and strong and
_dependable_, I know that godmother and Papa Jack feel perfectly safe in
giving Lloyd up to him. I think that even the old Colonel finds it a
little easier to be reconciled to the idea of her leaving because he is
so fond and proud of Rob. But he seems to take it to heart more than
any one else.

Lloyd thought he did, too, and when she first began to plan her wedding
she asked her father if he would feel hurt if she asked her grandfather
instead of him to go with her to the altar and give her away. "You know,
Papa Jack," she said in that saucy way of hers that no one about the
place can resist, "you cut him off from the one chance he should have
had to perform that ceremony, by running away with mothah. So it's only
fair you should make it up to him now by giving him the honah of
escorting me. Besides you and she have each othah, and he feels so left
out and lonely and is making such a deadly serious affair of my going
away."

Papa Jack saw it from her point of view and was entirely willing to do
as she wished. When the old Colonel found out what Lloyd wanted, he was
so touched and pleased and complimented that I think he must have lain
awake nights trying to think of things to show his appreciation. This
last week she called presentation week, because every single day he
surprised her with some lovely present.

The first day he gave her the little silver sugar-bowl with butterfly
handles and the cream-pitcher shaped like a lily that he had promised
her the first time she had a "pink party" up in his room, when she was
a tiny little girl. The next day it was a purse full of bright new gold
pieces, and the next a locket that had been his mother's, all set round
with sapphires, and with sapphires strung at intervals on the slender
chain that held it. One day the gift was a treasure of a rosewood chair
and writing-desk that had belonged to Lloyd's grandmother Amanthis, with
all the little mother-of-pearl articles that go with a desk, just as she
had used them. She was too surprised for anything the day he gave her
the harp. It had been called hers since she started to learn to play on
it, but she never for a moment supposed he would allow it taken away
from The Locusts. The sixth present had no intrinsic value, but he had
treasured it for years, a medal bestowed on one of his Virginia
ancestors by the king, as a reward for his services to the crown in
those early days of struggle and stress in the colonies.

Then last and best of all in Lloyd's eyes was a splendid copy of the
beautiful portrait of her grandmother Amanthis. I cannot distinguish it
from the original that has always hung over the mantel in the
drawing-room. The Colonel had a fine artist come on from New York to
paint it, while Lloyd was at the seashore this summer.

She was so happy over it and all her heirlooms. She said she didn't want
her father and mother to give her any new silver. They had talked about
a full set. She said there was so much old family plate over at Oaklea,
which she would far rather use. So godmother gave her a chest of linen,
and Papa Jack some shares in the Arizona mines. She has actually seemed
to take pleasure in the thought that she is marrying a poor man, and has
been preparing for it all during her engagement by keeping her expenses
within a certain limit instead of spending in the lavish way she has
always been accustomed to. She's taken such pride too in learning all
the housewifely arts that her grandmother and the Judge's wife were so
noted for.

Eugenia and Stuart Tremont came several days ago, and Joyce came with
them to be one of the bridesmaids. Phil could not leave his work just
now long enough to come, but he sent the dearest little gift--a
cut-glass honey dish and cover, with a honey spoon to go with it. The
spoon is a flat gold one with a cluster of bees on the handle. The note
he sent with it was dear, too, thanking her so beautifully for the
inspiration and help her friendship had been to him, and for her good
advice that sent him to "The School of the Bees."

Lloyd was so pleased that she hunted up a little unset turquoise he had
once given her as a friendship stone, and Rob took it to town and had a
jeweller set it into a tiny stick-pin for her, and she wore it as the
"something blue" at her wedding.

Rob couldn't afford to give her an expensive present like the diamond
pendant that Raleigh Claiborne gave Allison when they were married last
summer, but it pleased Lloyd more than a queen's tiara could have done.
It was just a little clasp to fasten her bridal veil. He had it made to
order--only a four-leaf clover, but the fourth leaf was diamond-set,
because, like the one Abdallah found in Paradise, it was the leaf of
happiness.

It was just a quiet church wedding, as simple as it could possibly be
made, in the late afternoon of one of the sweetest, goldenest October
days that ever shone on the Valley. Only her most intimate friends were
invited to the ceremony, because the little stone church is so small,
but the doors were thrown open to everybody at the reception that
followed at The Locusts.

Since the church has been frescoed inside and done over in soft cool
greens, it makes me think of the heart of a deep beech woods. The light
slips in through its narrow deep-set windows just as it does between
the trees in the dim forest aisles. Lloyd wouldn't have it filled with
hothouse roses. She said nothing could be as appropriate as the wild
flowers growing all around it in the country lanes and meadows. So there
was nothing but tall plumes of goldenrod nodding in every open window,
while the altar was a bank of snowy asters. She wanted them she said
because aster means star, and it was at the altar her happiness would be
written for her in the stars.

She said, too, that as long as it was in the country and she needn't
think of the conventions and could have things just as she pleased, she
wanted it to be a white wedding--everybody in the bridal party to wear
white. She said the old Colonel wouldn't look natural to her in anything
else that time of year, and all the others would appear to better
advantage. Every one said afterward what a beautiful picture it made.
Rob and Malcolm and Keith and Ranald and Alex are all handsome young
fellows anyhow, and they looked bigger and handsomer than ever in their
immaculate white suits. Malcolm was best man and I was maid of honour.
Kitty and Joyce and Katie Mallard were the bridesmaids. We girls carried
armfuls of the starry asters and the men wore them as boutonnières.

[Illustration: "'SHE LOOKED TO ME JUST LIKE ONE OF HER OWN LILIES.'"]

As for Lloyd, when she came out of her room, her dress trailing behind
her like a soft, pure-white cloud, so light and airy it seemed as if it
must have been woven on some fairy loom, and with a great cluster of
lilies-of-the-valley in her hands, she looked to me just like one of her
own lilies. Poor old Mom Beck, who had dressed her, stood behind her
with the tears streaming down her black face, saying, "Honey, you sho'ly
nevah will look moah like a blessed angel when you git through the
pearly gates than you do this minute!"

From the look on Rob's face as he met her at the white starry-crowned
altar, I am sure he felt that he had already gone through "the pearly
gates." It was all so sweet and solemn, and as we listened to the words,
"_Whom God hath joined together_," I think we all felt that heaven's own
benediction rested on them, and would follow them all their way to the
"Land o' the Leal."

How the people of the Valley poured in at The Locusts afterward to wish
them joy! Old and young, rich and poor, white and black, for of course
all the old servants of both families had to come in to pay their
respects. I am sure that no more heartfelt good wishes were uttered than
their "God bless you, Miss Lloyd, honey," or "I wish you joy, Mistah
Rob," as the faithful black hands that had served them from babyhood
grasped theirs with loyal good-will. They seem to count this year that
joins the two old families and estates as a sort of year of jubilee.

It isn't often that a wedding has everybody's approval as this one has.
Lloyd has always been as much of a favourite at Oaklea as Rob is at The
Locusts. The Judge is radiantly happy and Mrs. Moore has been as sweet
and considerate about everything as if Lloyd were really her own
daughter. She wants Lloyd to take the place as mistress of the house
just as she did when _she_ went there a bride. She and Rob's father
didn't take a wedding journey, but went straight home to Oaklea to spend
their honeymoon, and she was so pleased when she found that Lloyd and
Rob wanted to do the same. She and the Judge waited just long enough to
welcome them home to-night, and then took the train for Alabama to visit
some of her people. They have long been wanting to make the trip, and so
chose this time.

All the details of the supper were carried out just as they were at
Eugenia's wedding, excepting the charms. Lloyd vowed she had lost faith
in them since Mammy Easter's fortune had failed to come true. By rights
Joyce should have been married before either Allison or herself because
she caught Eugenia's bouquet. But because the girls still believed in
them she did throw her bouquet from the top of the steps just before she
left, and Kitty caught it.

It is only a step over to Oaklea, so she went away in her bridal gown
and veil. I'll never forget the picture she made as she stood there in
the moonlight, waiting for the carriage to drive up for them, or the
adoring look in Rob's eyes as he turned to lead her down the steps.
Somehow it makes the tears come crowding up in such a mist I can hardly
see to write.

And now I have come to the last page of this volume of my Good-times
book. Dear Lloyd, dear little sister who was the beginning of all my
good times, I am glad that heaven has sent you this happy day for me to
chronicle! What a beautiful Road of the Loving Heart your girlhood has
left in the memory of all your friends! What a spirit of joy you have
been in this old home, and what an aching void you have left behind you!
No matter what the years may hold in store, you will _be_ a blessing
wherever you go, for you have learned to keep tryst with all that life
demands of you. And because you were true to your Hildegarde promise
and wove only according to the silver yardstick, I can close this record
in the same words that end the old story we have both loved so long:
"_So with her father's blessing light upon her, she rode away beside the
prince; and ever after all her life was crowned with happiness as it had
been written for her in the stars!_"


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Varied hyphenation retained, for
example, upstairs and up-stairs.

Page 16, "vestage" changed to "vestige" (swept away every vestige)

Page 52, "It" changed to "Is" (Is he anything)

Page 95, "van guard" changed to "vanguard" (rear and a vanguard)

Page 131, "ilke" changed to "like" (Marks, like a good)

Page 236, "thinkng" changed to "thinking" (in thinking it over)







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Colonel's Knight Comes
Riding, by Annie Fellows Johnston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 39594-8.txt or 39594-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/5/9/39594/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
